SEVENTY EIGHT 

DEGREES OF 
WISDOM 


A psychological approach to the Tarot, examining all 
aspects of the cards - their origins, symbolism and their 
historical, mythological and esoteric background. 


SEVENTY EIGHT 


DEGREES OF 

WISDOM 

A BOOK OF TAROT 

Part r.T^e Major Arcana 


Rachel Pollack 



THE AQUARIAN PRESS LIMITED 
Wellingborough, Northamptonshire 



First published 1980 


© RACHEL POLLACK 1980 


This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way 
of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise, 
circulated without the publisher s prior consent in any form of 
binding or cover other than that m which it is published and 
without a similar condition including this condition being imposed 
on the subsequent purchaser. 

ISBN 0 85030 220 X 
Photoset by 

Specialised OHset Services Limited, Liverpool 
and printed and bound in Great Britain by 
Wcathcrby Woolnough Limited, 
Wellingborough, Northamptonshire 



Contents 

Page 


Introduction 7 

Chapter 

1. The Four Card Pattern 14 

2. The Overview 21 

3. The Opening Trumps: Symbols and Archetypes 24 

4. The Worldly Sequence 40 

5. Turning Inwards 54 

6 . The Great Journey 99 

Bibliography 12 g 


To Marilyn, who taught me so much by becoming my student. And 
to Edie, the best reader I know. 




Introduction 


Origins of the Tarot 

round the middle of the fifteenth century, not so long 
K \ after the first written references in Europe to cards of 
any kind, an artist named Bonifacio Bembo painted a 
. ■** J set of unnamed and unnumbered cards for the 

^ ' & Visconti family of Milan. These pictures comprise the 

classic deck for an Italian game called ‘Tarocchi’: four suits of 
fourteen cards each, plus twenty-two cards showing different scenes 
and later called ‘triomffi' - in English, ‘triumphs’, or ‘trumps’. 

Now, of these twenty-two images many can be interpreted as 
simply a catalogue of medieval social types, such as (to give them 
their later names) ‘the Pope’ or ‘the Emperor’, or else common 
medieval moral homilies, such as ‘the Wheel of Fortune’. Some 
represent virtues, like ‘Temperance' or ‘Fortitude’. Others show 
religious-mythological scenes, such as the dead rising from the grave 
at the trumpet call for ‘the Last Judgement’. There is even a card 
depicting a popular heresy, the image of a female pope, which we 
can describe as a joke on the Church with rather deeper significance 
than most ecclesiastical humour. Still, we can view this heretical 
picture as deeply rooted in popular culture, and therefore obvious to 
someone representing medieval ‘types’. 

One figure, however, stands out as rather strange. It shows a 
young man hanging upside down by his left leg from a simple 
wooden frame. His hands are held casually behind his back to form 
a triangle with his head at the bottom, his right leg is bent behind 
his knee to produce the figure of a cross, or else the numeral four. 
The face appears relaxed, even perhaps entranced. Where did 
Bembo derive this image? It certainly does noi represent a criminal 
hanged at the gallows, as some later artists have assumed. 

Christian tradition describes St Peter as being crucified upside 
down, ostensibly so he could not be said to be copying his Lord. In 
the Elder Edda, however, the god Odin is described as hanging 



8 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


upside down from the World Tree for nine days and nights, not as a 
punishment, but in order to receive enlightenment, the gift of 
prophecy. But this mythological scene itself derives from the actual 
practice of shamans, medicine men and women, in such places as 
Siberia and North America. In the initiation and training the 
candidates for shamanism are sometimes told to hang upside down 
in precisely the manner shown in Bembo's card. Apparently the 
reversal of the body produces some sort of psychological benefit, in 
the way that starvation and extreme cold will induce radiant visions. 
The alchemists - who, with the witches, were possibly the survivors 
of the shamanist tradition in Europe - also hung themselves upside 
down, believing that elements in the sperm vital to immortality 
would thus flow down to the psychic centres at the top of the head. 
And even before the West began to take Yoga seriously everyone 
knew the image of the yogi standing on his head. 

Did Bembo simply wish to represent an alchemist? Then why not 
use the more common image, that of a bearded man stirring a 
cauldron or mixing chemicals? The picture, titled ‘the Hanged 
Man’ in subsequent decks and later made famous by T.S. Eliot in 
The Wasteland , appears not so much as an alchemist as a young 
initiate in some secret tradition. Was Bembo himself an initiate? 
The special crossing of the legs, an esoteric sign from secret societies, 
would suggest so. And if he included one reference to esoteric 
practices, might not other images, superficially a social 
commentary, in reality represent an entire body of occult 
knowledge? Why, for instance, did the original deck contain twenty- 
two cards, not say, twenty or twenty-one or twenty-five, all of which 
are more commonly given significance in Western culture? Was it 
chance, or did Bembo (or perhaps others whom Bembo simply 
copied) wish to slyly represent the esoteric meanings connected to 
the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet? And yet, if any 
evidence exists anywhere connecting Bembo or the Visconti family 
to any occult group no one has produced it for public scrutiny. 

A brief look at the stunning correspondences between the Tarot 
and the body of Jewish mysticism and occult knowledge, called 
collectively the Qabalah, will demonstrate the way in which 
Bembo’s cards seem almost to demand an esoteric interpretation, 
despite the lack of hard evidence. The Qabalah dwells very deeply 
on the symbolism of the Hebrew alphabet. The letters are connected 
to the paths of the Tree of Life and they are each given their own 
symbolic meanings. Now, the Hebrew alphabet contains, as noted, 
twenty-two letters, the same number as the trumps of Tarocchi. The 
Qabalah also goes deeply into the four letters of Gods 
unpronounceable name, YHVH. They represent the four worlds of 


INTRODUCTION 


9 


creation, the four basic elements of medieval science, four stages of 
existence, four methods of interpreting the Bible, and so on. There 
are four court cards in each of Bembo's four suits. 

Finally, the Qabalah works with the number ten - the Ten 
Commandments and ten sephiroth (stages of emanation) on each of 
the four Trees of Life And the four suits contain cards numbered 
from one to ten Do we wonder then that Tarot commentators have 
claimed that the deck originated as a pictorial version of the 
Qabalah, meaningless to the masses, but highly potent to the few ? 
And yet, in all the thousands of pages of Qabalistic literature, not 
one word appears about the Tarot, 

Occultists have claimed secret sources for the cards, such as a 
grand conference of Qabalists and other Masters in Morocco in 
1300, but no one has ever produced any historical evidence for such 
claims. Even more damning, Tarot commentators themselves do not 
mention the Qabalah until the nineteenth century. And of course, 
the names and numbers sequence, so vital to their interpretations, 
came after the original images. 

If we accept Carl Jung s idea of basic spiritual archetypes 
structured into the human mind we can perhaps say that Bembo 
unconsciously tapped hidden springs of knowledge, allowing later 
imaginations to make the conscious connections. And yet, such 
exact and complete correspondences as the twenty-two trumps, the 
four court cards and ten pip cards in the four suits, or the position 
and ecstatic face of the Hanged Man, would seem to strain even 
such a potent force as the Collective Unconscious. 

For years Tarocchi was seen primarily as a game for gambling, 
and to a much lesser extent as a device for fortune-telling. Then, in 
the eighteenth century, an occultist named Antoine Court de 
Gebelin declared the Tarot (as the French called the game) to be the 
remnant of the Book of Thoth, created by the Egyptian god of magic 
to convey all knowledge to his disciples. Court de Gebelin s idea 
appears far more fanciful than factual, but in the nineteenth century 
another Frenchman, Alphonse Louis Constant, known as Eliphas 
Levi, linked the cards to the Qabalah, and since then people have 
looked deeper and deeper into the Tarot, finding more and more 
meanings, wisdom, and even, through meditation and deep study, 
enlightenment. 

Today, we see the Tarot as a kind of path, a way to personal 
growth through understanding of ourselves and life. To some the 
Tarot's origin remains a vital question, for others it only matters 
that meanings have accrued to the cards over the soars. 

For Bembo did create an archetype, whether consciously or from 
deep instinct. Beyond any system or detailed explanations, the 



10 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


images themselves, changed and elaborated over the years by 
different artists, fascinate and entrance us. In this way they draw us 
into their mysterious world which ultimately can never be 
explained, but only experienced. 

Different Versions of the Tarot 

Most modern Tarots differ very little from those fifteenth century 
sets of cards. They still contain seventy-eight cards divided into the 
four suits, Wands, Cups, Swords, and Coins or Pentacles, called 
collectively the ‘Minor Arcana’, and the twenty-two trumps, known 
as the ‘Major Arcana’ (the word ‘arcanum’ means ‘secret 
knowledge’). True, some of the pictures have changed considerably, 
but each version usually keeps the same basic concept. For example, 
there are several widely varying versions of the Emperor, but they all 
represent some idea of an Emperor. In general, the changes have 
tended towards the more symbolic and the more mystical. 

This book uses as its primary source, the Tarot of Arthur Edward 
Waite, whose very popular Rider pack (named after its British 
publisher) appeared in 1910. Waite was criticized for changing some 
of the trump cards from their accepted version. For instance, the 
common picture of the Sun shows two children holding hands in a 
garden. Waite changed it to one child on a horse riding out of a 
garden. The critics claimed Waite was altering the card’s meaning 
to his personal vision. This was probably the case, since Waite 
believed more strongly in his own ideas than those of anyone else. 
But few people stopped to consider that the earliest version of the 
Sun, that of Bembo, in no way resembles the supposed ‘traditional' 
version. Indeed, it seems closer to Waite's; the picture shows a single 
miraculous child flying through the air, holding up a globe with an 
image of a city inside it. 

The most striking change Waite and his artist, Pamela Colman 
Smith, made was to include a scene on all the cards, including the 
numbered cards of the Minor Arcana. Virtually all previous decks, 
as well as many later ones, have simple geometric patterns for the 
‘pip’ cards. For example, the ten of Swords will show ten swords 
arranged in a pattern, much like its descendant, the ten of spades. 
The Rider pack is different. Pamela Smith’s ten of Swords shows a 
man lying under a black cloud with ten swords stuck in his back and 
legs. 

We do not really know who actually designed these cards. Did 
Waite himself conceive them (as he undoubtedly did the Major 
Arcana), or did he simply tell Smith the qualities and ideas he 
wanted and allow her to invent the scenes? Waite’s own book on the 
Tarot, The Pictorial Key to the Tarot , makes little real use of the 





INTRODUCTION 


11 


pictures. In some cases, such as the six of Swords, the picture 
suggests far more than Waite’s stated meaning, while in others, 
particularly the two of Swords, the picture almost contradicts the 
meaning. 

Whether it was Waite or Smith who designed the pictures, they 
had a powerful effect on later Tarot designers. Almost all decks with 
scenes on every card rely very heavily on the pictures in the Rider 
pack. 

Waite called his deck the ‘rectified Tarot'. He insisted that his 
pictures ‘restored’ the true meanings of the cards, and throughout 
his book he scorns the versions of his predecessors. Now, by 
‘rectified’ many people will think Waite’s membership in secret 
societies gave him access to the ‘original’ secret Tarot. More likely, 
he simply meant that his pictures gave the cards their deepest 
meanings. When he so drastically altered the card of the Lovers, for 
instance, he did so because he thought the old picture insignificant 
and his new one symbolic of a deep truth. 

I do not mean to suggest that Waite's cards are simply an 
intellectual construction, like a scholar rearranging some speech of 
Hamlet's in a way which makes more sense to him. Waite was a 
mystic, an occultist, and a student of magic and esoteric practices. 
He based his Tarot on deep personal experience of enlightenment. 
He believed his Tarot to be right and the others wrong because it 
represented that experience. 

I have chosen the Rider pack as my source for two reasons. 
Firstly, 1 find many of its innovations extremely valuable. The 
Waite-Smith version of the Fool strikes me as more meaningful than 
any of the earlier ones. Secondly, the revolutionary change in the 
Minor Arcana seems to me to free us from the formulas that 
dominated the suit cards for so long. Previously, once you read and 
memorized the given meanings of a Minor card you could not really 
add to it; the picture suggested very little. In the Rider pack we can 
allow' the picture to work on the subconscious; we can also apply our 
own experience to it. In short, Pamela Smith has given us something 
to interpret. 

Above I wrote that I chose the Rider pack as my ‘primary’ source. 
Most books on the Tarot use one deck alone for illustrations. This 
self-limitation perhaps stems from a desire to represent the ‘true’ 
Tarot. By choosing one deck and not another we are really declaring 
that one is correct and the other is false. Such a declaration matters 
most to those writers, like Aleister Crowley or Paul Foster Case, who 
consider the Tarot a symbolic system of objective knowledge. This 
book, however, looks upon the cards more as an archetype of 
experience. Seen that way no deck is right or wrong, but is simply a 


12 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

furthering of the archetype. The Tarot is both the total of all the 
different versions over the years, and an entity apart from any of 
them. In the cases where a version other than Waite’s will deepen 
the meaning of a specific card we will look at both images. In some 
cases, Judgement for instance, or the Moon, the differences are 
subtle; in others, the Lovers, or the Fool, the difference is drastic. By 
looking at several versions of the same experience we heighten our 
awareness of that experience. 

Divination 

Today, most people see the Tarot as a means of fortune-telling, or 
‘divination’. Strangely, we know less historically about this aspect of 
the cards than any other. Judging by the comparatively few 
historical references to divination as opposed to gambling, the 
practice did not become common until some time after the 
introduction of the cards themselves. Possibly the Romany, or 
‘gypsies’, came across the game of Tarocchi on their travels in 
Europe and decided to use the cards for fortune-telling. Or 
individuals developed the concept (the earliest written references are 
individual interpretations, though they might have derived from 
some earlier system, not written down but in general use) and the 
Romany took it from them. People used to believe that the Romany 
themselves brought the cards from Egypt. The fact is, the Romany 
probably came from India, and they arrived in Spain a good 
hundred years after Tarot cards were introduced in Italy and 
France. 

In the section on readings we will consider just what divination 
does, and how such an outrageous practice could possibly work. 
Here we can simply observe that people can and have told fortunes 
with anything - the smoky innards of slaughtered beasts, bird 
patterns across the sky, coloured stones, tossed coins, anything. The 
practice stems from the simple desire to know, in advance, what is 
going to happen, and more subtly, from the inner conviction that 
everything is connected, everything has meaning and that nothing 
occurs at random. 

The very idea of randomness is really very modern. It developed 
out of the dogma that cause and effect is the only valid connection 
between two events. Events without this logical joining are random, 
that is, meaningless. Previously, however, people thought in terms of 
‘correspondences’. Events or patterns in one area of existence 
corresponded to patterns in other areas. The pattern of the zodiac 
corresponds to the pattern of a person’s life. The pattern of tea 
leaves in the bottom of a cup corresponds to the outcome of a battle. 
Everything is connected. The idea has always claimed its adherents, 


INTRODUCTION 


13 


and recently even some scientists, impressed by the way events will 
occur in series (like a ‘run of bad luck’), have begun to look seriously 
at it. 

If we can use anything for fortune-telling why use the Tarot? The 
answer is, that any system will tell us something ; the value of that 
something depends on the inherent wisdom of the system. Because 
the Tarot pictures carry deep significance all by themselves, the 
patterns they form in readings can teach us a great deal about 
ourselves, and life in general. Unfortunately, most diviners over the 
years have ignored these deeper meanings, preferring simple 
formulas (‘a dark man, one disposed to help the querent’), easily 
interpreted and quickly digested by the client. 

The formula meanings are often contradictory as well as blunt, 
with no indications of how to choose between them. This situation 
holds true especially for the Minor Arcana which is the bulk of the 
deck. Almost no works on the Tarot have treated this subject fully. 
Most serious studies, those which deal with the deep meanings of 
the Major Arcana, either do not mention the Minor cards at all, or 
simply throw in another set of formulas at the back, as a grudging 
addition for those readers who will insist on using the deck for 
fortune-telling. Even Waite, as mentioned, simply gives his own 
formulas to the remarkable pictures drawn by Pamela Smith. 

While this book will deal extensively with the concepts embodied 
in the cards and their symbolism it will also look carefully at the 
application of these concepts to Tarot readings. Many writers, 
notably Waite, have denigrated divination as a degenerate use of the 
cards. But the proper use of readings can greatly increase our 
awareness of the cards’ meanings. It is one thing to study the 
symbolism of a particular card, it is something else to see that card 
in combination with others. Many times I have seen specific 
readings open up important meanings that would not have emerged 
in any other way. 

Readings teach us a general lesson as well, and a very important 
one. In a manner no explanation can possibly equal, they 
demonstrate that no card, no approach to life, is good or bad except 
in the context of the moment. 

Finally, giving readings gives each person a chance to renew his or 
her instinctive feeling for the pictures themselves. All the symbolism, 
all the archetypes, all the explanations given in this book or any 
other can only prepare you to look at the pictures and say, ‘This 
card tells me,..’. 





Chapter i. 

T fe Four Card Pattern 


Unity and Duality 

hrough its long history the Major Arcana has 
attracted a great many interpretations. Today, we 
tend to look upon the trumps as a psychological 
process, one that shows us passing through different 
stages of existence to reach a state of full development; 
we can describe this state, for the moment, as unity with the world 
around us, or perhaps liberation from weakness, confusion, and fear. 
The full Arcana describes this process in detail, but to get an under¬ 
standing of it as a whole we need look at only four cards; four basic 
archetypes arranged in a graphic pattern of evolution and spiritual 
aw'areness. 

If you have your own deck of Rider Pack Tarot cards* remove the 
Fool, the Magician, the High Priestess, and the World, and place 
them in the diamond pattern shown overleaf. Look at them for a 
while. Notice that while both the Fool and the World show dancing, 
joyful figures, the Magician and the High Priestess are stationary and 
unmoving in their positions. If you glance through the rest of the 
Major Arcana you will notice that all the trumps but 0 and 21 are 
drawn as if staged for a still photograph, rather than say, a motion 
picture. They present themselves as fixed states of existence. 

But there is a difference between the two dancers. The Fool rushes 
forward richly clothed; the figure in the World is naked. The Fool 
looks about to leap into the lower world from some high distant 
country; the World paradoxically appears outside the material 
universe, the Dancer suspended in a magical wreath of victory. 

Note also the numbers of the four cards. 0 is not strictly a number 

• In other decks, particularly those older than Waite’s the Fool appears very different 
from the one shown here. The chapter on the symbolism of the Fool (page 24) will 
deal with this alternative tradition. 




THE FOUR CARD PATTERN 


15 



at all, rather it represents the absence of any specific number, and 
therefore we can say that it contains all numbers within itself. It 
symbolizes infinite potentiality. All things remain possible because 
no definite form has been taken. 1 and 2 are the first genuine 
numbers, the first reality; again, a fixed state. They form the 
archetypes ‘odd’ and ‘even’, and therefore represent all opposites, 
male and female, light and dark, passive and active, etc. But 21 
combines these two numbers in one figure. 

Look at their postures. The Magician raises a magic wand to 
heaven. Besides the ideas of spirit and unity, the phallic wand 
symbolizes maleness. The High Priestess sits between two pillars, a 
vaginal symbol as well as a symbol of duality. These two pillars 
appear again and again in the Major Arcana, in such obvious places 
as the temple in the Hierophant, and in more subtle ways, like the 
two lovers on card 6, or the two sphinxes harnessed to the Chariot. 
But now look at the World. The dancer, a female figure (though 









16 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


some decks represent her as a hermaphrodite) carries two magic 
wands, one in each hand. The male and female are unified, and 
more, their separate qualities are subordinated to the higher 
freedom and joy shone in the light way the dancer holds these 
powerful symbols. 

Clearly, then, while the horizontal line, the Magician and the 
High Priestess, shows a duality of opposites, the vertical line, 0 and 
21, shows a unity, the Fool being some sort of perfect state before 
duality, and the World giving us a glimpse of the exhilarating sense 
of freedom possible if only we can reconcile the opposites buried in 
our psyches. 

The Tarot, like many systems of thought, indeed like many 
mythologies, symbolizes duality as the separation of male and 
female. The Qabalists believed that Adam was originally 
hermaphroditic, and that Eve only became separate from him as a 
result of the Fall. In most cultures, to a greater or lesser degree, men 
and women see each other as very distinct, almost separate societies. 
Today, many people think of each person as having both masculine 
and feminine qualities, but previously such an idea was found only 
in esoteric doctrines of unification. 

If we picture duality dramatically as male and female, or black 
and white, we also experience more subtle splits in our ordinary 
lives, especially between our hopes, what we imagine as possible, 
and the reality of what we achieve. Very often the actions we take 
turn out not to fulfil our hopes for them. The marriage gives less 
than the total happiness expected, the job or career brings more 
frustration than fulfilment. Many artists have said that the 
paintings on the canvases are never the paintings they envisioned; 
they never can express what they really wanted to say. Somehow the 
reality of life is always less than the potential. Acutely aware of this, 
many people agonize over every decision, no matter how small or 
great, because they cannot accept that once they take an action in 
one direction they have lost the chance to go in all the other 
directions previously open to them. They cannot accept the 
limitations of acting in the real world. 

The split between potentiality and reality is sometimes seen as the 
separation between mind and body. We sense that our thoughts and 
emotions are something distinct from our physical presence in the 
world. The mind is unlimited, able to go anywhere in the universe, 
backwards or forwards in time. The body is weak, subject to hunger, 
tiredness, sickness. Attempting to resolve this separation people 
have gone to philosophical extremes. Behaviourists have claimed 
that ‘mind’ does not exist; only the body and the habits it develops 
are real. At the other end, many mystics have experienced the body 





THE FOUR CARD PATTERN 


17 


as an illusion created by our limited understanding. Christian 
tradition defines the ‘soul’ as the immortal ‘true’ self, existing before 
and after the body that contains it. And many religions and sects, 
such as the Gnostics and some Qabalists, have considered the body 
a prison, created by the sins or mistakes of our fallen ancestors. 

At the source of all these dualities we feel we do not know 
ourselves. We sense that deep down our true nature is something 
stronger, freer, with great wisdom and power; or else a thing of 
violent passions and furious animal desire. Either way, we know that 
this true self hides, or perhaps lies buried deep inside our normal, 
socially restricted personalities. But how do we reach it? Assuming 
the essential self to be a thing of beauty and power, how do we 
liberate it? 

The disciplines we call the ‘occult sciences’ begin with a strong 
awareness of all these splits and limitations. They then go on, 
however, to another idea, that there exists a key, or a plan, to bring 
everything together, to unify our lives with our hopes as we release 
our latent strength and wisdom. People often confuse the purposes 
of spiritual disciplines. Many think the Tarot is for fortune-telling, 
that alchemists want to become rich by changing lead to gold, that 
Qabalists w'ork spells by saying secret words, and so on. In reality, 
these disciplines aim at a psychological unification. The ‘base metal’ 
that the alchemist wishes to change to gold is himself. Accepting the 
doctrine that we have fallen from a perfect state to a limited one the 
occultist does not believe we must simply wait passively for some 
future redemption by an outside agent. On the contrary, he or she 
believes it our responsibility to bring about that redemption by 
finding the key to unity. 

The Tarot depicts a version of that ‘key’. It is not the key, just as it 
is not really a secret doctrine. It represents a process, and one of the 
things it teaches us is that we make a mistake when we assume that 
unification comes through any simple key or formula. Rather, it 
comes through growth and increased awareness as we travel step by 
step through the twenty-one stages of the Major Arcana. 

The Fool represents true innocence, a kind of perfect state of joy 
and freedom, a feeling of being one with the spirit of life at all times; 
in other words, the ‘immortal’ self we feel became entrapped in the 
confusions and compromises of the ordinary world. Perhaps such a 
radiant self never really existed. Somehow we experience our 
intuition of it as something lost. Virtually every culture has 
developed a myth of a Fall from a primeval paradise. 

‘Innocence’ is a word often misunderstood. It does not mean 
without guilt’ but rather a freedom and a total openness to life, a 
complete lack of fear that comes through a total faith in living and in 



18 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


your own instinctive self. Innocence does not mean ‘asexual’ as some 
people think. It is sexuality expressed without fear, without guilt, 
without connivance and dishonesty. It is sexuality expressed 
spontaneously and freely, as the expression of love and the ecstasy of 
life. 

The Fool bears the number 0 because all things are possible to the 
person who is always ready to go in any direction. He does not 
belong in any specific place; he is not fixed like the other cards. His 
innocence makes him a person with no past, and therefore an 
infinite future. Every moment is a new starting point. In Arabic 
numerals the number 0 bears the shape of an egg, to indicate that all 
things emerge from it. Originally the zero was written as a dot; in 
Hermetic and Qabalistic tradition the universe emerged from a 
single point of light. And God in the Qabalah is often described as 
‘nothingness’ because to describe God as any thing would be to limit 
Him to some finite fixed state. Those Tarot commentators who 
argue whether the Fool belongs before, after, or somewhere between 
the other cards seem to be missing the point. The Fool is movement, 
change, the constant leap through life. 

For the Fool no difference exists between possibility and reality. 0 
means a total emptiness of hopes and fears, and the Fool expects 
nothing, plans nothing. He responds instantly to the immediate 
situation. 

Other people will receive his complete spontaneity. Nothing 
calculated, nothing held back. He does not do this deliberately, like 
someone consciously deciding to be wholly honest with a friend or a 
lover. The Fool gives his honesty and love naturally, to everyone, 
without ever thinking about it. 

We speak of the Fool as ‘he’ and the World Dancer as ‘she’ 
because of their appearance in the pictures, but both can be a 
woman or a man with really no change. Just as the Fool does not 
experience a separateness from the physical world so he or she does 
not experience any isolation from the ‘opposite sex’. The Fool and 
the Dancer are psychic hermaphrodites, expressing their complete 
humanity at all times, by their very natures. 

Now look again at the four card pattern. See how the Fool splits 
into the Magician and the High Priestess, who must be brought 
back together again to form the World. The two cards represent the 
splitting up of the Fool’s innocence into the illusion of opposites. 
The World shows us a restored unity, but a higher and deeper unity 
achieved through the growth outlined in the other eighteen cards. 
The fool is innocence, but the World is wisdom. 



THE FOUR CARD PATTERN 


19 


Innocence and Freedom 

The Fool teaches us that life is simply a continuous dance of 
experience. But most of us cannot maintain even brief moments of 
such spontaneity and freedom. Due to fears, conditioning, and 
simply the very real problems of daily life, we necessarily allow our 
egos to isolate us from experience. Yet within us we can sense, 
dimly, the possibility of freedom, and therefore we call this vague 
feeling of a loss, a ‘fall’ from innocence. Once we lose that innocence, 
however, we cannot simply climb back to the level of the Fool. 
Instead, we must struggle and learn, through maturity, self- 
discovery, and spiritual awareness, until we reach the greater 
freedom of the World. 

The Magician represents action, the High Priestess passivity, the 
Magician maleness, the High Priestess femaleness, the Magician 
consciousness, the High Priestess unconsciousness. 

By ‘consciousness’ we do not mean the high awareness of the 
World, but rather the powerful yet limited consciousness of ego as it 
creates an outer universe of boundaries and forms. This description 
does not mean to denigrate or belittle the Magician’s creative force. 
What greater creativity is there than giving shape to the chaos of 
experience? It is the Magician who gives life its meaning and 
purpose. Healers, artists, and occultists have all focused on the 
Magician as their patron card. Nevertheless, his power represents 
an isolation from the freedom of the Fool or the understanding of the 
World. 

In the same way, the High Priestess indicates, in her 
unconsciousness, a very deep state of intuitive awareness. And yet, 
her inner knowledge does not belong to that radiant centre of 
nothingness that enables the Fool to act so freely. 

The High Priestess represents the archetype of inner truth, but 
because this truth is unconscious, inexpressible, she can maintain it 
only through total passivity. This situation shows itself in life in 
numerous ways. We all carry within us a dim sense of who we are, of 
a genuine self never seen by other people and impossible to explain. 
But the women and men who throw themselves into competition, 
careers, responsibilities, without working at the same time to 
increase self-knowledge, often discover at some point that they have 
lost the sense of who they are, and what they once wanted in life. 
Now, directly opposite to these people, the Buddhist monk or nun 
withdraws from the world because the slightest involvement will 
distract them from the centre of their meditations. 

Both the Magician and the High Priestess bear an archetypal 
purity. In a way, they have not lost the Fool’s radiance, they have 
simply split it up into light and darkness. In the traditional split of 




20 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Western and Eastern religion the Magician represents the West, 
with its emphasis on action and historical salvation, the High 
Priestess the East, the way of separation from the world and time. 
Yet those who have gone deepest in both traditions will combine 
these elements. 

The High Priestess sits between the pillars of light and dark. 
Though she herself symbolizes the dark passive side, her intuition 
can find a balance between the two. This is less paradoxical than it 
sounds. If we sense our lives as filled with opposites which we cannot 
resolve, we can react in either of two ways. We can rush back and 
forth, going from one extreme to the other, or we can do absolutely 
nothing. Sit in the middle, not seduced in either direction, but 
passive, allowing the opposites to go on around you. Except, of 
course, that this too is a choice, and eventually we lose that balance 
and that inner knowledge simply because life continues on around 
us. 

In Qabalist imagery the High Priestess represents the Pillar of 
Harmony, a force which reconciles the opposing Pillars of Mercy 
and Judgement. Therefore she sits between the tw'o pillars of the 
temple. But without the ability to blend in the active force of the 
Magician, the High Priestess’s sense of harmony becomes swept 
away. 

As archetypes, the Magician and the High Priestess cannot exist 
in our lives any more than the Fool can. Inevitably, we mix up these 
elements (rather than blend them) and thereby experience their 
lesser forms, as confused action, or else insecure and guilt ridden 
passivity. In other words, the purity of the two poles becomes lost 
because life muddles them together. 

The purpose of the Major Arcana is twofold. First of all, by 
isolating the elements of our lives into archetypes it enables us to see 
them in their pure forms, as aspects of psychological truth. 
Secondly, it helps us to truly resolve these different elements, to take 
us step by step through the different stages of life until it brings us to 
unity. In reality, perhaps the innocence symbolized by the Fool 
never existed. Somehow we experience as something lost. The Major 
Arcana tells us how to get it back. 





Chapter i. 

T l?e Overview 

The Cards as a Sequence 

ost interpreters of the Major Arcana take one of two 
approaches: either they consider the cards as separate 
entities or they look at them as a sequence. The first 
approach looks at each card as representing different 
qualities or situations of importance to a person’s 
spiritual development. The Empress represents the soul glorified in 
nature, the Emperor mastery of self, etc. This system considers the 
numbers on the cards as part of their symbolic language. The 
number 1 belongs to the Magician not because he comes first but 
because that number signifies ideas - unity, will power - 
appropriate to the concept of the Magician. 

The second approach looks upon the trumps as a progression. 
The Magician is 1 because his qualities form the starting point of the 
growth pattern figured in the other cards. Card number 13, say, 
belongs at just that point, between the Hanged Man and 
Temperance, and no other. Each new trump builds upon the 
previous one and leads the way to the next. 

In general, I have followed the second method. While the number 
symbolism should not be neglected it is equally important to see 
where each card fits in the overall pattern. Comparisons with other 
numbers can also help us to see the limitations as well as the virtues 
of each card. For instance, number 7, the Chariot, is often spoken of 
as ‘victory’. But what kind of victory? Is it the total liberation of the 
World, or something narrower, but still of great value? Looking at 
the card’s position can answer these questions. 

The interpreters who have taken this approach have -usually 
looked for some place to divide the trumps for easier comprehension. 
The most common choice is the Wheel of Fortune. As the number 
ten, it symbolizes a completion of one cycle and a beginning of 
another. Also, if you place the Fool at the beginning this divides the 




22 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

cards neatly into two groups of eleven. Most important, the idea of a 
turning wheel symbolizes a change of outlook, from a concern with 
external things, such as success and romance, to the more inward 
approach depicted in such cards as Death and the Star. 

Despite the value of seeing the Major Arcana as two halves, I have 
found that the trumps divide even more organically into three parts. 
Setting the Fool apart as really a separate category all by itself (and 
setting it apart allows us to see that it belongs everywhere and 
anywhere) gives us twenty-one cards - three groups of seven. 

The number seven has a long history in symbolism: the seven 
planets of classical astrology, seven as a combination of three and 
four, themselves archetypal numbers, seven pillars of wisdom, the 
seven lower stations of the Tree of Life, seven openings in the human 
head, seven chakras, and of course, seven days in the week. 

One particular aspect of seven relates it directly to the Tarot. The 
Greek letter pi stands for a ratio that exists in all circles between the 
circumference and the diameter. No matter how large or small the 
circle, the two will always work out to the same fraction, 22/7. And 
the Major Arcana with the Fool comes to twenty-two, just as 
without the Fool it reduces to seven. Also, twenty-two times seven 
equals one hundred and fifty-four (154 adds up to ten, linking it to 
the Wheel), and one hundred and fifty-four divided by two, for the 
two Arcana, comes to seventy-seven, the entire Tarot with the Fool 
again set aside. 

Like the Qabalistic conception of God the point is nothing, yet the 
entire circle radiates from it. And the Fool’s number, 0, has been 
represented as a circle as well as a point. 

The best reasons for the division into three groups lie within the 
Major Arcana itself. First, consider the picture symbolism. Look at 
the first card in each line. The Magician and Strength are both 
obviously cards of power, but so is the Devil. The Magician and 
Strength are linked by the infinity sign above their heads, while the 
Devil bears a reversed pentacle. If you look at the Devil’s posture, 
one arm up, one arm down, you will see the picture is in some ways 
a parody of the Magician, with the torch pointing down instead of 
the wand pointing up. In some decks card 15 carries the title of 
‘Black Magician’. (In many decks Justice, not Strength is number 8. 
If you look at the posture of the figure injustice you will see an even 
closer resemblance to the Magician and the Devil.) The same kind 
of vertical correspondences apply all the way through the three lines. 


The Three Areas of Experience 

The division into three allows us to see the Major Arcana as dealing 
with three distinct areas of experience. Briefly, we can call these: 






THE OVERVIEW 


23 


consciousness, the outer concerns of life in society; subconscious, or 
the search inward to find out who we really are; and super¬ 
conscious, the development of a spiritual awareness and a release of 
archetypal energy. The three levels are not forced categories. They 
derive from the cards themselves. 

The first line, with its concentration on such matters as love, 
social authority, and education, describes the main concerns of 
society. In many ways the world we see mirrored in our novels, 
films, and schools is summed up by the first seven cards of the Major 
Arcana. A person can live and die and be judged a success by 
everyone around him or her without ever going beyond the level of 
the Chariot. Many people, in fact, do not reach that level at all. 

Modern depth psychology concerns itself with the second line of 
trumps, with their symbols of a hermit-like withdrawal into self- 
awareness followed by a symbolic Death and rebirth. The angel of 
Temperance at the end represents that part of ourselves which we 
discover to be essentially real after the illusions of ego, defensiveness, 
and rigid habits of the past are allowed to die away. 

Finally, what of the last line? What can go beyond finding our 
true selves? To put it simply, these seven cards depict a 
confrontation and finally a unity with the great forces of life itself. 
The other cards, formerly seen as so important, become merely the 
preparation for the great descent into darkness, the liberation of 
light, and the return of that light to the sunlit world of 
consciousness. 

To most readers the last line will seem too vague and fanciful. We 
can call this subject matter ‘religious’ or ‘mythical’ but these words 
too remain hard to grasp. 

The vagueness in our minds perhaps speaks more about ourselves 
and our time than about the subject. Any society automatically 
teaches its people, just by the language it uses, to make certain 
assumptions about the world. Examples in our culture would 
include the value and uniqueness of individuals, the reality and 
overwhelming importance of love, the necessity of freedom and 
social justice, and, more complex, but just as strong, the basic 
separateness of each person. ‘We are born alone and we die alone.’ 
Our society, built upon the materialist eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries, does not merely reject the notion of ‘superconsciousness’ 
or ‘universal forces’, we do not really know what they mean. 

When we deal with the last line of the Major Arcana, then, we 
deal with an area uncomfortable to many of us. It will make the task 
of understanding these cards harder - and perhaps more rewarding. 
Working with these ancient pictures can bring us knowledge 
neglected in our education. 




Chapter 3 . 

t\) 6 Opening Trvmps: 
Symbols and Archetypes 



The Fool 

e have already looked at the Fool in one aspect, the 
image of a spirit totally free. But we can look at the 
Fool from another side - the leap into the archetypal 
world of the trumps. 

Imagine yourself entering a strange landscape. A 
world of magicians, of people hanging upside down, and of dancers 
in the bright air. You can enter through a leap from a height, 










THE OPENING TRUMPS 


25 


through a dark cave, a labyrinth, or even by climbing down a rabbit 
hole chasing a Victorian rabbit with a pocket watch. Whichever way 
you choose, you are a fool to do it. Why look into the deep world of 
the mind when you can stay safely in the ordinary landscape of job, 
home and family? Herman Melville, in Moby Dick , warned his 
readers not to take even a step outside the ordinary path laid out for 
you by society. You might not get back again. 

And yet, for those willing to take the chance, the leap can bring 
joy, adventure, and finally, for those with the courage to keep going 
when the wonderland becomes more fearsome than joyous, the leap 
can bring knowledge, peace, and liberation. Interestingly, the Fool 
archetype appears more in mythology than in structured religion. 
An institutionalized Church can hardly urge people beyond the 
limits of institutions. Instead, the churches offer us a safe haven from 
the fears of life. Mythology leads directly into the heart of those 
fears, and in every culture the mythological landscape contains the 
image of the Trickster - pushing, goading, jabbing the kings and 
heroes whenever they turn away from the inner world of truth. 

In the King Arthur legends Merlin appears not only as a sorcerer 
and wise man but as a trickster. Constantly he appears before 
Arthur in disguise, as a child, a beggar, an old peasant. The young 
king, already seduced into pompousness by his high social position, 
never recognizes Merlin until his companions point out that he has 
been tricked again. More important than laws or military strategy is 
the ability to see through illusions. The Taoist masters-were famous 
for playing tricks on their disciples. 

The Fool archetype has even found social expression, as the real 
court jester. We all know the image from King Lear of ‘the fool’, 
permitted to tell the king truths no one else would dare to express. 
Today, our comedians and satirists enjoy something of the same 
privilege. 

In many countries a yearly carnival releases all the wildness 
repressed through the rest of the year. Sex is freer, various laws are 
suspended, people go in disguises and the King of Fools is chosen to 
preside over the festival. Today, in Europe and North America, 
April the first remains ‘April Fool’s Day’, a time for tricks and 
practical jokes. 

The picture beside that of the Rider pack shows the Fool as 
conceived by Oswald Wirth. An older tradition than that of Waite, 
it pictures the archetype as a grotesque wanderer. This image has 
been interpreted variously as the soul before enlightenment, a 
newborn child entering the world of experience and the principle of 
anarchy. Elizabeth Haich has provided an interesting interpretation 
of Wirth’s grotesque image of the Fool. Placing him between 


26 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Judgement and the World, she describes the Fool as what the 
outside world sees when it looks upon someone who is truly 
enlightened. Because the Fool does not follow their rules or share 
their weaknesses, he appears to them in this ugly distorted way. 
Haich describes the Fool’s face as a mask, put there not by himself 
but by the outside world. The last card, the World, presents the 
same enlightened person, but viewed from inside, that is, by himself. 

In some early Tarot decks the Fool appeared as a giant court 
jester, towering over the people around him. His title was ‘the Fool 
of God’. The term has also been used for idiots, harmless madmen, 
and severe epileptics, all of whom were thought to be in touch with a 
greater wisdom precisely because they were out of touch with the 
rest of us. 

The archetype persists in modern popular mythology as well. By 
their fantastic primitive nature comic books often reflect 
mythological themes better than novels. In Batman the hero’s 
strongest enemy is called the Joker, a figure who has no past and is 
never seen without the wild make-up of a joker in a deck of cards. 
The joker, of course, descends directly from the Fool of tarochhi. 
The rivalry of Batman and the Joker sends a clear message to their 
readers: do not rebel against social values. Support law and order. 
In recent years the magazine has described the Joker as insane 
rather than criminal. To society the way of the Fool, instinct rather 
than rules, is a dangerous insanity. 

So far we have looked at the Fool as the ‘other’, prodding us from 
complacency with his jokes and disguises. As the ‘self’ he represents 
that long tradition of the foolish brother or sister, despised by the 
older brothers and sisters, yet finally able to win the princess or the 
prince through instinctive wit and kindness. 

Curiously the image of the Fool as self occurs more in fairy tales 
than myths. We look at myths as representing forces larger than 
ourselves; the simpler fairy tale allows us to express our own 
foolishness. 

Like ‘Boots’ or ‘Gluck’ in the fairy tale, always accompanied by 
various animal helpers, the Fool in almost every deck walks with a 
companion. In Waite the figure is a leaping dog, in others a cat or 
even a crocodile. The animal symbolizes the forces of nature and the 
animal self of man, all in harmony with the spirit who acts from 
instinct. Mythological dogs are often terrifying, for example, the 
Hound of Hell chasing lost souls. But it is really the same beast; only 
our attitude changes. Deny your inner self and it becomes ferocious. 
Obey it and it becomes benign. 

Waite’s Fool holds a white rose. Roses symbolize passion, while 
white, the traditional colour of purity, together with the delicate way 



THE OPENING TRUMPS 


27 


the flower is held, indicate the passions raised to a higher level. The 
Greeks saw Eros, the god of love, as a trickster, making the most 
proper people act ridiculous. But those who already express their 
folly will not be thrown by love. The Greeks also spoke of Eros, in 
other forms, as the animating force of the universe. 

The bag behind him carries his experiences. He does not abandon 
them, he is not mindless, they simply do not control him in the way 
that our memories and traumas so often control our lives. The bag 
bears the head of an eagle, symbol of the soaring spirit. His high 
instinct fills and transforms all experience. The eagle is also the 
symbol of Scorpio raised to a higher level, that is, sexuality raised to 
spirit. This idea of the connection between sex and spirit will come 
up again with the card of the Devil. 

Over his shoulder the Fool carries a stick, like a tramp. But this 
stick is actually a wand, symbol of power. The Magician and the 
Chariot driver also carry wands, but self-consciously, with a 
powerful grip. The Fool and the World Dancer hold their wands so 
casually we hardly notice them. What could be more foolish than to 
take a magic wand and use it to carry your bags? We can imagine a 
fairy tale in which the foolish younger brother finds a stick by the 
side of the road and carries it, not recognizing it as the lost wand of a 
wizard, and therefore not being destroyed like his two older brothers 
who tried to wield it for their own profit. 

The Fool’s wand is black; the others are white. For the 
unconscious Fool the spirit force remains always in potential, always 
ready, because he is not consciously directing it. We tend to mis¬ 
understand the colour black, seeing it as evil, or negation of life. 
Rather, black means all things being possible, infinite energy of life 
before consciousness has constructed any boundaries. When we fear 
blackness or darkness we fear the deep unconscious source of life 
itself. 

Like the joker, the Fool really belongs anywhere in the deck, in 
combination with and between any of the other cards. He is the 
animating force giving life to the static images. In the Major Arcana 
he belongs wherever there is a difficult transition. Hence his position 
at the beginning, where there is the transition from the everyday 
world of the Minor Arcana to the world of archetypes. The Fool also 
helps us jump the gap from one line to the next, that is, from the 
Chariot to Strength, from Temperance to the Devil. To reach the 
Chariot or Temperance requires great effort and courage, and 
without the Fool’s readiness to leap into new territory we would 
likely stop with what we have already achieved. 

The Fool belongs as well with those cards of difficult passage, 
such as the Moon and Death (observe the winding road on each of 




28 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

these two), where he urges us on despite our fears. 

In the Minor Arcana the Fool relates first of all to Wands - action, 
eagerness, movement without thought. But it connects as well to 
Cups, with their emphasis on imagination and instinct. The Fool, in 
fact, combines these two suits. Later we will see that this 
combination, fire and water, represents the way of transformation. 

Finally the question arises of the Fool’s place in divinatory 
readings. I have already mentioned the importance of readings for a 
fuller understanding of the cards. Even more, they help us apply the 
wisdom of the cards to our daily lives. In readings the Fool speaks to 
us of courage and optimism, urging faith in ourselves and in life. At 
difficult times, when we come under pressure from people around us 
to be practical, the Fool reminds us that our own inner selves can 
best tell us what to do. 

The Fool can often symbolize beginnings, courageously leaping 
off into some new phase of life, particularly when that leap is taken 
from some deep feeling rather than careful planning. 

These belong to the Fool in its normal position. We must also 
consider the ‘reversed’ meanings, that is, when the way we have 
mixed the cards makes the Fool come out with the feet on the top. 
Reversed meanings are controversial among Tarot commentators. 
Those who give formulas as meanings usually just turn the formula 
around, a simplistic method which has led several interpreters to 
abandon the whole idea of reversed meanings. But we can also look 
at reversals as deepening the meaning of the card as a whole. In 
general, a reversed card indicates that the qualities of that card have 
become blocked, distorted or channelled in another direction. 

For the Fool a reversal means first of all a failure to follow your 
instincts. It can mean not taking a chance at some crucial time, 
because of fear or depending too much on plans and the practical 
advice of others. 

Another reversed meaning of the Fool will appear at first to 
contradict the one just given. Recklessness, wildness, crazy schemes 
all seem the opposite of over-caution. And yet, they originate from 
the same weakness, a failure to act from inside. The reckless person 
superimposes a conscious or artificial foolishness on his life both 
because he does not trust the unconscious to act as a guide and 
because is also afraid of doing nothing. 

This second reversed meaning suggests another dimension to the 
Fool - the awareness that great chances must be taken only at the 
proper time. There are, after all, many times when caution is 
needed, and times when it is better to do nothing at all. The basic 
thing any oracle teaches us is that no action or attitude is right or 
wrong, except in its proper context. 





TH E OPENING TRUM PS 29 

As wc go further into the Tarot we will see that this concept of the 
proper time permeates the cards and is, in fact, the true key to their 
correct use. The card in the Rider pack that falls exactly in the 
middle of the three lines, that is, Justice, means a proper response. 


THE MAGICIAN 


Figure 2 

The Magician 

The Magician emerges very directly from the Fool in the image of 
the trickster-wizard. As mentioned above, Merlin fulfils both these 
roles (as well as that of teacher and wise man), and many other 
myths make the same connection. Earlier Tarot decks pictured 
trump number one as a conjurer rather than a magus, or even a 
juggler tossing coloured balls in the air. Charles Williams described 
him as a juggler tossing the stars and planets. 

Most modern images of the trump follow Waite’s wizard, raising 
a magic wand to bring into reality the spirit force - the energy of life 
in its most creative form. He holds the wand carefully, aware of that 
psychic power the Fool carried so lightly on his shoulder. Thus, the 
Magician, as the beginning of the Major Arcana proper, represents 
consciousness, action and creation. He symbolizes the idea of 
manifestation, that is, making something real out of the possibilities 
in life. Therefore, we see the four emblems of the Minor Arcana - 
lying on a table in front of him. He not only uses the physical world 
for his magical operations (the four emblems are all objects used by 








30 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


wizards in their rituals), but he also creates the world, in the sense of 
giving life a meaning and direction. 

The Magician stands surrounded by flowers to remind us that the 
emotional and creative power we feel in our lives needs to be 
grounded in physical reality for us to get any value from it. Unless 
we make something of our potentials they do not really exist. 

‘In the beginning, God created the heaven and the earth.’ The 
Bible begins at the moment the spirit descends into physical reality. 
For us, in the physical world, we can talk of nothing before this 
moment. In the linking of the Tarot with the Hebrew alphabet the 
Fool often receives the first letter Aleph. (Aleph bears no sound; it is a 
silent carrier of vowels, and therefore symbolizes nothingness. It is 
the first letter of the Ten Commandments.) This would assign the 
second Hebrew letter, Beth, the first letter with an actual sound, to 
the Magician. Beth is the first letter of Genesis. 

Look at Waite’s picture of the Magician. He is not casting spells, 
or conjuring up demons. He simply stands with one hand raised to 
heaven and the other pointed to the green earth. He is a lightning 
rod. By opening himself up to the spirit he draws it down into 
himself, and then that downward hand, like a lightning rod buried 
in the ground, runs the energy into the earth. Into reality. 

We see many accounts of the ‘descent of the spirit’ in the Bible, in 
other religious texts and in contemporary religious experience. 
People ‘speak in tongues’ in Pentecostal churches, they scream and 
shout and roll on the floor at Gospel meetings. The priest giving 
communion sees himself as a ‘vessel’ or channel for the Holy Ghost. 
But we can see this experience in much simpler, non-religious, terms 
as well. People tremble with excitement at sporting events. ‘I’m so 
excited I could burst!’ In a new love affair or at the start of a new 
career, we feel a power filling us. You can sometimes see people at 
the opening of some important phase of their lives, tapping their legs 
up and down, half bouncing in their seats, filled with some energy 
they cannot seem to discharge. And writers and artists, when their 
work is going well, will experience themselves as almost passive 
channels for a spirit-like force. The word ‘inspiration’ originally 
meant ‘filled with a holy breath’, and derives from the same root as 
‘spirit’. 

Notice that of all these examples all but the priest and the artist 
are seized with a frenzy. The possessed church-goer and the 
teenager about to burst at a football game share the feeling that their 
bodies are overwhelmed by a power too great for it. Far from being 
gentle the surge of energy can be almost painful. The person in 
religious fervour shouts and leaps about in order to release an 
unbearable energy. 




THE OPENING TRUMPS 


31 


The life force that fills the universe is not gentle or benign. It must 
be discharged, grounded in something real, because our bodies, our 
selves, are not meant to contain it, but only pass it on. Thus, the 
artist does not join in the physical frenzy because she or he is 
discharging that power into the painting. Similarly the priest passes 
the power into the bread and wine. 

We function best as a channel for energy. Unless we follow the 
path of the High Priestess in withdrawing from the world, we live 
our lives most fully when we create or are active. ‘Create’ does not 
mean simply art, but any activity that produces something real and 
valuable outside of ourselves. 

Many people experience feelings of being powerful so infrequently 
they try to hold on to them. By doing nothing they hope to preserve 
their magic moments. But we can really hold on to power in our lives 
only by constantly discharging it. By releasing creative power we 
open ourselves up to receive a further flow. However, by trying to 
hold on to it, we block the channels and the sense of power, which is 
really life itself, withers within us. The spectator at the football 
game, even the possessed church-goer, will find their excitement 
gone after the event that triggered it has ended. But the craftsman or 
scientist or teacher - or, for that matter, the Tarot reader - will find 
the power increase over the years the more they discharge it into 
physical reality. 

When we look at the Magician those of us who feel a lack or a 
flatness in our lives will be drawn to the wand raised towards 
heaven. But the real magic rests in that finger pointing to the earth. 
That ability to create gives him his title. His image stems not only 
from the trickster-conjurer, but also from the archetypal hero. In our 
culture this would be Prometheus, who brought the heavenly fire 
down to weak and cold humanity. 

In the West we tend to see wizards as manipulators. They learn 
secret techniques or make deals with Satan in order to gain personal 
power. This somewhat decadent image comes partly from the 
magicians themselves, since they make charms to find buried 
treasure, but also from the Church, which sees magicians, who deal 
directly with the spirit instead of going through the official 
priesthood, as competitors. The Tarot and all occult sciences are in 
a sense revoltionary, because they teach direct salvation, in this life, 
through your own efforts. 

We can get a different concept of the Magician through the image 
of the shaman, or medicine man. Because no hierarchical Church 
has arisen to banish the shamans they have not become isolated 
from the community. They serve as healers, teachers, and directors 
of the sot ' after death. Like the wizards, the shamans study and 



32 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


learn complicated techniques. Their magical vocabulary is often 
much larger than the everyday vocabulary of the people around 
them. None of this training, however, is used to manipulate the 
spirit or for personal gain. Rather, the shaman only seeks to become 
a proper channel, both for himself so he will not be overwhelmed, 
and for the community so he can serve them better. He knows the 
great power that will enter him at moments of ecstasy and he wants 
to make sure it does not destroy him and make him of no use to the 
people around him. 

Like the wizard the shaman has developed his will to the point 
where he can direct the fire that fills him. At the same time he 
remains open, allowing his ego to dissolve under the direct 
onslaught of the spirit. It says something about our culture that our 
wizards stand inside magic circles to make sure the demons cannot 
touch them. 

We can apply the shaman attitude to our use of the whole Tarot 
deck. We study the cards, learn the symbolic language, even specific 
formulas, in order to give a direction to the feelings they arouse in 
us. But we must not forget that the true magic lies in the images 
themselves and not the explanations. 

The divinatory meanings of the Magician derive from both hands, 
the one which receives the power and the one which directs. The 
card means first of all an awareness of power in your life, of spirit or 
simple excitement possessing you. It can also mean, depending on 
its position and your reaction to it, someone else’s power affecting 
you. Like the Fool, the card refers to beginnings, but here the first 
actual steps. It can mean both the inspiration to begin some new 
project or phase of life, and the excitement that sustains you through 
the hard work to reach your goal. For many people the Magician 
can become a strong personal symbol for the creative force 
throughout their lives. 

Secondly, the Magician means will-power; the will unified and 
directed towards goals. It means having great strength because all 
your energy is channelled in a specific direction. People who seem 
always to get what they want in life are often people who simply 
know what they want and can direct their energy. The Magician 
teaches us that both will-power and success derive from being 
conscious of the power available to everyone. Most people rarely act; 
instead they react, being knocked from one experience to the next. 
To act is to direct your strength, through the will, to the places 
where you want it to go. 

The Magician reversed signifies that in some way the proper flow 
of energy has become disrupted or blocked. It can mean a weakness, 
a lack of will or a confusion of purpose that leads to doing nothing. 





THE OPENING TRUMPS 33 

The power is there, but we cannot touch it. The card reversed can 
mean the lethargic apathy that characterizes depression. 

The reversed trump can also mean power abused, a person who 
uses his or her very strong character to exert a destructive influence 
on others. The most direct example of this would of course be the 
psychic aggression of‘black magic’. 

Finally, the Magician reversed indicates mental disquiet, 
hallucinations, fear and particularly fear of madness. This problem 
arises when the energy or spirit fire enters a person who does not 
know how to direct it into an outer reality. If we do not ground the 
lightning it can become trapped in the body and force itself on our 
awareness as anxiety or hallucinations. Anyone who has ever gone 
through a moment of total panic will know that acute mental 
anxiety is a very physical experience, a feeling of the body running 
wild, like a fire out of control. The word ‘panic’ means ‘possessed by 
the god Pan’, himself a symbol of magical forces. 

Think again of the lightning rod. It not only attracts the bolt but 
runs it into the dirt. Without that connection to the earth the 
lightning would burn down the house. 

Several writers have commented on the relationship between 
shamanism and what the West calls ‘schizophrenia’. Shamans are 
often not so much chosen as found. If, in our culture, a young person 
experiences visions, fearful hallucinations, we do not know what to 
do with such experiences other than to try and stop them, by drugs 
and self-control. But in other cultures, such people receive training. 
This is not to say that madness does not exist or is not recognized in 
archaic cultures. Rather, the training is meant to prevent madness 
by channelling the experiences into a productive direction. 

The initiates learn, through study with an established shaman, 
and through physical techniques such as fasting, how to understand, 
structure and finally direct these visionary experiences towards the 
service of the community. The Magician reversed should not be 
banished or confined; instead, we must find the way to turn it right 
side up. 






SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Figure 3 

The High Priestess 

Bill Butler, in The Definitive Tarot has commented on the historical¬ 
legendary sources for this female archetype. Throughout the Middle 
Ages the story persisted that a woman was once elected Pope. 
Disguised for years as a man, this supposed ‘Pope Joan 1 made her 
way through the Church hierarchy to the top position, only to die in 
childbirth during an Easter celebration. 

Pope Joan was most likely a legend; the Visconti Papess was real. 
In the late thirteenth century an Italian group called the 
Guglielmites believed that their founder, Guglielma of Bohemia, 
who died in 1281, would rise again in 1300 and begin a new age in 
which women would be popes. Jumping ahead they elected a 
woman named Manfreda Visconti as the first papess. The Church 
graphically ended this heresy by burning Sister Manfreda in 1300, 
the year of the expected new age. Some hundred years later the same 
Visconti family commissioned the first set of Tarot cards as we know 
them. Among these unnumbered and unnamed trumps appeared a 
picture of a woman later decks titled ‘The Papess'. 

The name persisted until the* eighteenth century when Court de 
Gebelin, believing the Tarot to originate in the Isis religion of 
ancient Egypt, changed the name to the High Priestess. Today both 
names exist (as well as ‘Veiled Isis’), and the Waite image of the 























THE OPENING TRUMPS 35 

card derives directly from the Isis priestess’s symbolic clothing, 
particularly the crown representing the three phases of the moon. 

The Pope Joan legend and Manfreda Visconti are not simply 
historical curiosities. They illustrate a major social development in 
the Middle Ages, the reintroduction of the female and feminine 
principles into religion and cosmology. The images and the concepts 6 ' 
associated with the masculine role had dominated both the Church 
and Jewish religion for centuries. As a result ordinary people 
experienced the religions of the priests and rabbis as remote, harsh, 
and unapproachable, with their emphasis on sin, judgement, and 
punishment. They wanted qualities of mercy and love. And they 
identified these with women. Like a mother shelters her child from 
the somewhat distant strictness of the father, a female diety 
supposedly would intrude for the pathetic sinners against the 
unremitting judgement of the Father. 

It is interesting to realize that in many ways the Church saw 
Christ, as the Son, in exactly that role of introducing love and 
compassion. Yet, the people demanded a female. Even the idea of 
the Church as ‘Mother Church’ did not go far enough. Finally, the 
Church capitulated by raising the Virgin Mary almost to the level of 
Christ himself. 

Many writers and scholars believe that the elevation of Mary - as 
well as the priests’ costume of long skirts - originated in the 
Church’s desire to assimilate a persistent goddess religion from the 
days before Christianity. If this is true it would indicate not so much 
a cultural conservatism as the power of the female archetype to 
maintain a hold and partially triumph against suppression. 

In Judaism the official religion of the rabbis managed to resist any 
insurgent feminism. The people’s need, however, took hold in 
another area: the long tradition of the Qabalah. The Qabalists took 
a term from the Talmud, ‘Shekinah’, which meant God’s glory 
manifest in the physical world, and revised it to make it God’s 
anima, or female side. The Qabalists also revised the idea of Adam, 
making him originally hermaphroditic. The separation of Eve from 
Adam, even the separation of the Shekinah from God, became 
results of the Fall; the absence of the female from the official religion 
became almost a matter of sin rather than purity. 

So far we have looked at the benign motherly qualities of female 
mythological figures. Historically, however, female deities have 
always shown a dark, hidden side as well. To introduce the female at 
all is to introduce the whole archetype. The Tarot splits up the 
feminine archetype into two trumps and actually assigns the benign 
qualities to the second one (trump 3), the Empress. The High 
Priestess herself represents a deeper, more subtle aspect of the 



36 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


female; that of the dark, the mysterious and the hidden. As such, she 
connects to the virgin side of the Virgin Mary, the pure daughter 
side of the Shekinah (who was pictured simultaneously as mother, 
wife, and daughter). 

We should realize that this assigning of qualities to women comes 
mostly from men and male ideas. The Qabalists, the occultists, and 
the Tarot designers, all deplored the separation of men and women 
into categories and taught unification as a final goal. This is shown 
by the World dancer of the Tarot. They were ahead of the 
established religion which even debated whether women had souls at 
all. Nevertheless, men still made the categories. To men, women have 
always appeared mysterious, strange, and, when safely in their 
mother role, loving and merciful. Women seem alien to men, more 
subtle in their thinking and non-rational. In our time, constant novels 
and films have pictured simple men manipulated by cunning women. 

The fact that the menstrual cycle lasts about as long as the lunar 
cycle links women to that remote silvery body. Menstruation itself, a 
copious bleeding from the genitals, with no loss of life, has simply 
terrified men through the centuries. Even today superstitious Jews 
believe that one drop of menstrual blood will kill a plant. The fearful 
mystery of birth further connected women to the idea of darkness. 
The foetus grows and the soul enters it in the warm moist darkness 
of the womb. Motherhood linked women to the earth, and there too 
darkness dominates. Seeds lie in the ground through the dark dead 
winter, to emerge as food under the warm reassuring rays of the sun 
which, in many cultures, is considered as male. 

Just as the sun’s rays penetrate the earth so the male organ 
penetrates the female to leave a seed in her mysterious womb. We 
can easily see how men came to view themselves as active and 
women as both passive and mysterious. People often link passive 
with ‘negative’ or that is, inferior and weak. But passivity contains 
its own power. It gives the mind a chance to work. People who only 
know action never get a chance to reflect on what that action has 
taught them. In a deeper sense, passivity allows the subconscious to 
emerge. Only through withdrawal from outer involvement can we 
allow the inner voice of vision and psychic forces to speak to us. It is 
precisely to avoid this inner voice that many people never rest from 
action and movement. Our society, based completely on outer 
achievement, fosters a terror of the subconscious; yet without its 
wisdom we can never fully know ourselves or the world. 

The High Priestess represents all these qualities: darkness, 
mystery, psychic forces, the power of the moon tr\ stir the 
subconscious, passivity, and the wisdom gained from it. This 
wisdom cannot be expressed in rational terms; to try to do so would 




THE OPENING TRUMPS 


37 


be to immediately limit, narrow, and falsify it. Most people at some 
time have felt they understood something in such a deep way that 
they could never manage to explain it. Myths serve as metaphors for 
deep psychic feelings; yet the myths themselves, like the 
explanations given by theologians and anthropologists, are only 
symbols. The High Priestess signifies inner wisdom at its deepest 
level. 

She sits before two pillars, representing both the temple of Isis 
and the ancient Hebrew temple in Jerusalem, the dwelling place of 
God on earth, in other words, the home of the Shekinah. A veil 
hangs between the two pillars, indicating that we are barred from 
entering the place of wisdom. The image of the veiled temple or 
sanctuary appears in many religions. The Shekinah was indeed said 
to dwell within the veiled ark of the temple. 

Now, most people assume we are somehow forbidden to pass the 
pillars of the High Priestess. In reality, we simply do not know how 
to. To enter behind the veil would be to know consciously the 
irrational wisdom of the unconscious. That is the goal of the entire 
Major Arcana. Look carefully at Smith’s picture. You can see what 
lies behind the veil by looking between the veil and the pillars. And 
what lies behind is water. No great temple or complex symbols, 
simply a pool of water, a line of hills, and the sky. The pool signifies 
the unconscious and the truth hidden there. The water is 
motionless, the secrets in its darkest depths, hidden under a smooth 
surface. For most of us, at most times, the turbulent subconscious 
remains hidden under a placid layer of consciousness. We cannot 
enter the temple because we do not know how to go into ourselves; 
therefore we must travel through the trumps until we reach the Star 
and the Moon, where we can finally stir up the waters and return 
with the wisdom to the conscious light of the Sun. 

The temple introduces the image of the two pillars, and the theme 
of duality and opposites. The image occurs again and again through 
the trumps, in such obvious places as the Hierophant’s church 
pillars or the two towers of the Moon (the pillars of the High 
Priestess seen from the other side), but also in more subtle ways, 
such as the two sphinxes of the Chariot, or the man and woman of 
the Lovers. Finally, Judgement, with the child rising between a man 
and a woman, and the World, holding two wands, resolves the 
duality by uniting the inner mysteries with the outer awareness. 

The letters ‘B’ and ‘J’ stand for Boaz and Jakin, the names given 
to the two main pillars of the temple in Jerusalem. Obviously, the 
dark Boaz stands for passivity and mystery while Jakin symbolizes 
action and consciousness. Notice, though, that the letters carry the 
reverse indications, a white B and a black J. Like the dots in the Tao 






38 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

symbol the letters signify that duality is an illusion, and each 
extreme carries the other imbedded inside it. 

In her lap she holds a scroll marked ‘Tora’. This name refers to 
the Jewish law, the Five Books of Moses which is usually spelled 
‘Torah’ in English. This particular spelling allows the word to serve 
as an anagram for ‘Taro’. As the ultimate subject of all Qabalistic 
meditations (like Christ’s crucifixion for Christian mystics) the 
Torah carries a great deal of esoteric significance. The Qabalists 
believed that the Torah read on Saturday mornings in the 
synagogues was only a representation, a kind of shadow of the true 
Torah, the living word of God that existed before the universe and 
contains within it all true existence. The Tora held by the High 
Priestess, rolled up and partly concealed in her cloak, therefore 
signifies a higher knowledge closed to us with our lower 
understanding. We can describe it also as the psychic truths 
available to us only in the distorted form of myths and dreams. 

Earlier we spoke of the Fool coming in at crucial moments of 
change to push us along. The gap between the High Priestess and 
the Empress is one such moment. We can too easily be seduced by 
the dark coolness of the second trump, even if we never really 
penetrate its secrets. The person beginning in spiritual discipline 
often prefers to stay at the visionary level rather than go through the 
slow hard work needed to advance. Many people in more ordinary 
situations will find life too overwhelming, too vast and demanding, 
for them to take part. We can best use the High Priestess’s passivity 
as a balance to the outward-looking attitude of the Magician, but 
many people find the passive side extremely attractive. It represents 
an answer to struggle, a quiet retreat instead of the harsh glare of 
self-exposure when we involve ourselves openly with other people. 

But the human mind does not work like that. It requires passion 
and it needs to connect itself to the world. If we cannot penetrate the 
veil the temple remains for us an empty place, devoid of meaning. 
The person who tries to live a completely passive life becomes 
depressed, more and more trapped in a cycle of apathy and fear. 

Virtually all moon goddess religions feature myths of the 
goddess’s ferocious side. Ovid tells the story of Actaeon, a hunter, 
and therefore a figure who properly belonged to the world of action. 
He happened one day to see a stream and decided to follow it to its 
source (again, water as a symbol of the unconscious). Thus he 
became separated from his dogs and the other hunters, and when he 
had reached the source, away from the active world, he saw a group 
of maidens. Among them, naked, stood the virgin goddess, Diana. 
Now, if Actaeon had returned immediately to the outer world he 
would have found his life enriched. Instead, he allowed Diana’s 












THE OPENING TRUMPS 


39 


beauty to fascinate him; he stayed too long, and the goddess, 
discovering that a man had seen her nakedness (compare the High 
Priestess’s layers of clothing with the Star maiden’s nudity) turned 
Actaeon into a stag. When he ran away, terrified, his own dogs tore 
him to pieces. 

Here the Fool comes in (and remember the Fool’s dog, leaping at 
his side), reminding us to dance lightly away from both these 
visions, the Magician as well as the High Priestess, until we are truly 
ready to assimilate them. 

The divinatory meanings of the High Priestess deal first with a 
sense of mystery in life, both things we do not know, and things we 
cannot know. It indicates a sense of darkness, sometimes as an area 
of fear in our lives, but also one of beauty. A period of passive 
withdrawal can enrich our lives by allowing things inside to awaken. 

As an emblem of secret knowledge the trump indicates that 
feeling of intuitively understanding the answer to some great 
problem, if only we could express that answer consciously. More 
specifically, the card can refer to visions and to occult and psychic 
powers, such as clairvoyance. 

In its most positive aspect the High Priestess signifies the 
potential in our lives - very strong possibilities we have not realized, 
though we can sense them as possible. Action must follow or the 
potential will never be realized. 

Despite its deep wisdom the card can sometimes carry a negative 
meaning. Like most of the trumps, the High Priestess’s value 
depends on the context of the other cards. Negatively the trump 
indicates passiveness at the wrong time or for too long, leading to 
weakness, fear of life and other people. It shows a person with strong 
intuition who cannot translate feelings into action, or a person afraid 
to open up to other people. Whether the good or bad aspect of the 
card comes up in a particular reading depends on the surrounding 
cards and of course the reader’s intuition (we partake of the High 
Priestess every time we read the cards). Very often both meanings 
will apply. Human beings have more than one side. 

The High Priestess is an archetype, a single minded picture of one 
aspect of existence. When we reverse it we bring in the missing 
qualities. The card reversed signifies a turn towards passion, 
towards a deep involvement with life and other people, in all ways, 
emotionally, sexually and competitively. However, the pendulum 
can swing too far, and then the card reversed can symbolize a loss of 
that most precious knowledge: the sense of our inner selves. 


chapter^ 

T l)e Worldly) Sequence 


The Major Arcana and Personal Growth 

he first line of the Major Arcana takes us through the 
process of maturity. It shows the stages of a person’s 
growth from a child, to whom mother is all loving and 
father all powerful, through, education, to the point 
where the child becomes an independent personality. 
At the same time these cards deal with a much wider development, 
of which the individual development is a microcosm. They depict 
the creation of human society, out of both the archetypes of 
existence and the chaotic energy of nature. 

While they set the principles for the whole deck, the Magician and 
the High Priestess apply very specifically to the first line. The 
movement between opposites is the basic rhythm of the material 
world. Nothing exists absolutely in nature. In the words of Ursula 
Le Guin, ‘Light is the left hand of darkness and darkness the right 
hand of light’. When we move from the two principles to the 
Empress we are seeing the opposites mingle together in nature to 
produce the reality of the physical universe. 

The middle three cards of the line are a set. They show us a triad 
of nature, society, and the Church. They also signify mother, father, 
and education. In ancient Egypt the godhead was often viewed as a 
trinity. The persons changed from place to place and through the 
years, but they were usually a female and two males, with the female 
viewed as supreme. In the Tarot, nature, symbolized by the 
Empress, is the underlying reality, while her consorts, symbolized 
by the Emperor and the Hierophant,-are human constructs. 

The last two cards of the line represent the problems of the 
individual, love and sorrow, surrender and will. At some point each 
one of us must learn to distinguish ourselves from the outer world. 
Before this time personality remains a vague and formless creation 







41 


THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 

of parents and society. Those who never make the break become cut 
off from a full life. For most people the medium by which they break 
from their parents is the emergence (Freudians and perhaps 
occultists would say ‘re-emergence’) of the sexual drive at puberty. 
It is no accident that children rebel from their parents in ideas, 
habits, and dress at the same time that their bodies grow towards 
maturity. 

The development of individuality is only a part of growth. Each 
person must find his or her personal goals and achievements. At the 
same time he or she will sooner or later face sorrow, sickness, and 
the general weakness of a life governed by old age and death. Only 
when we reach a full understanding of the outer life of humanity can 
we hope to reach inwards for a deeper reality. 



Figure 4 


The Empress 

As stated in the previous chapter the Empress represents the more 
accessible, more benign aspects of the female archetype. She is 
motherhood, love, gentleness. At the same time she signifies 
sexuality, emotion and the female as mistress. Both motherhood and 
sex derive from feelings that are non-intellectual and basic to life. 
Passions rather than ideas. The High Priestess represented the 
mental side of the female archetype; her deep intuitive 
understanding. The Empress is pure emotion. 



















42 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Like the Cunning Woman, we see her reflected in our movies and 
novels as the exasperating female, who both frustrates and delights, 
because her thought processes follow no rational development. 
Many women find this image insulting, partly because it represents 
values and approaches judged as negative by our patriarchal society, 
and partly because people make the error of assuming that women 
and men should personally express these archetypal ideas. But the 
social images are crippling in another way as well. They are trivial. 
The Empress, along with such mythological counterparts as 
Aphrodite or Ishtar or Erzulie, represent something very grand. 
They signify the passionate approach to life. They give and take 
experience with uncontrolled feeling. 

Until we learn to experience the outer world completely we 
cannot hope to transcend it. Therefore the first step to 
enlightenment is sensuality. Only through passion, can we sense, 
from deep inside rather than through intellectual argument, the spirit 
that fills all existence. 

Many people see religion as an alternative to the natural world, 
which they view as somehow impure or dirty. Though our cultural 
tradition fosters this duality it is really an illusion, and the person 
who approaches spirituality with this motivation to escape will likely 
never achieve a very developed understanding. The body, and the 
natural world, are realities that must be integrated rather than 
denied. 

In the mythology of Buddhism we find that the gods manipulated 
Prince Siddhartha’s father into providing his son, Gantama, with 
every sensual satisfaction. The father believed that pleasure would 
prevent his son from renouncing the world and becoming a Buddha. 
The scheme backfired, because only after he had completely 
experienced sensuality could the prince leave it behind. After 
renouncing the world Gautama joined the ascetics, the other pole. 
But he reached enlightenment only when he had rejected both 
extremes for the Middle Way. Thus, we can see the Buddha in the 
World dancer who holds both the Magician and the High Priestess 
lightly in her hands. 

As a combination of 1 and 2 the number 3 signifies synthesis and 
harmony. The natural world combines the Magician and the High 
Priestess in an indivisible unity of life and death, darkness and light. 
The idea of emotion also brings together the Magician archetype of 
activeness with the High Priestess archetype of instinct. 

Consider as well the process of creation. The Magician 
symbolizes the energy of life, the High Priestess the possibilities of 
future development. The reality of the Empress results from their 
combination. Recently Carl Sagan demonstrated that life on earth 








THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 43 

might have begun when a lightning bolt struck the primordial sea. 
Thus again, from the lightning of the Magician striking the waters of 
the High Priestess, comes the natural world. 

The symbolism of the Waite-Smith Empress reflects the idea of 
nature, with all its force and glory. The Empress herself, voluptuous 
and sensual, suggests passion. Her shield is a heart with the sign of 
Y r enus, the Roman version of the Great Goddess. Throughout the 
ancient world the goddess ruled, as Demeter, Astarte, Nut, until the 
patriarchal invaders demoted her to wife (and finally banished her 
altogether with an all-male godhead). At the Empress’s feet grows a 
field of grain; the goddess ruled agriculture, and in North-Western 
Europe was called the ‘Corn Goddess’. She wears a necklace of nine 
pearls, for the nine planets, while her crown contains twelve stars for 
the signs of the zodiac. In short, she wears the universe as her 
jewellery. The Great Mother is not the forms of nature, but the 
underlying principle of life. The stars are six-pointed, a symbol 
much older than its current use as a social emblem for Judaism. The 
six-pointed star combines two triangles; the upwards one 
symbolizes fire, the downwards one water. Again, the Empress 
combines trumps 1 and 2 in a new reality. 

A river flows from the trees behind her to disappear beneath her 
seat. This river is the force of life, running like a great current 
beneath all the separate forms of reality, and experienced most fully 
when we give ourselves to unrestrained passion. Deep in our selves 
we can sense the rhythm of a river, carrying us forward through 
experience until, with death, our individual lives return to the sea of 
existence. 

The river symbolizes also the unity of change and stability. The 
water in it is never the same, yet it always remains a particular river, 
with its own special qualities. Human beings change from day to 
day, the cells of our bodies die and new ones take their place, yet we 
always remain ourselves. 

The number 3 produced by the combination of 1 and 2 brings out 
yet another idea. Just as the numbers 1 and 2 stood specifically for 
male and female, so the number 3 signifies the child produced by 
their joining together. The child is born as a creature of nature, 
unburdened with ego and personality, experiencing the universe 
directly, without controls or labels. It is only as we grow older that 
we learn to put barriers between ourselves and life. It is one of the 
goals of the Tarot to return us to that natural state of directly 
experiencing the world around us. 

But if the Empress signifies the child she also stands for the 
mother. Motherhood is the basic means by which life continues 
throughout nature. And because the physical bond of the mother 






44 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


and child is so direct, mother love, in its strongest form, is pure 
feeling, given without intellectual or moral considerations. (This is, 
of course, an ideal, and in reality such love may come more from the 
male parent than the female, or sadly, not at all.) Throughout 
history people have identified motherhood with nature, so that the 
term ‘Great Mother’ for the earth itself appears all over the world, 
and even today we speak vaguely of Mother Nature. 

In readings the Empress represents a time of passion, a period 
when we approach life through feelings and pleasure rather than 
thought. The passion is sexual or motherly; either way it is deeply 
experienced, and in the right context can give great satisfaction. In 
the wrong context, when analysis is needed, the Empress can mean 
a stubborn emotional approach, a refusal to consider the facts. She 
can indicate another problem as well: self-indulgent pleasure when 
restraint is needed. Usually, however, she indicates satisfaction and 
even understanding gained through the emotions. The reversed 
meanings of the cards also have their positive and negative contexts. 
On the one hand it can signify a retreat from feeling, either rejecting 
your emotions or attempting to suppress your desires, particularly 
sexual. However, just as the High Priestess, upside down, added the 
missing element of involvement, so the Empress reversed can mean a 
new intellectual awareness, especially the solving of some 
complicated emotional problem by calmly thinking it through. 

In their right side up and reversed meanings trumps 2 and 3 are 
mirrors of each other. It sometimes happens that in a reading both 
will appear, upside down. This means that the person expresses 
both emotional and intuitive mental aspects, but in a negative way. 
Rationality comes as a reaction to excessive emotional involvement, 
while a feeling of isolation or coldness leads to passion. If the two 
aspects of the goddess can be experienced right side up the person 
will achieve a more stable and rewarding balance. 





THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 


45 



(a) Figure 5 (b) 


The Emperor 

For each child its parents are archetypes. Not just mother and 
father, but Mother and Father. Because our mothers give us life and 
feed us and shelter us we tend to see them as figures of love and 
mercy (and get very upset when they act harshly or coldly). But the 
Father, especially in traditional times when the sex roles were 
stricter, remained more remote, and therefore a figure of severity. It 
was the father who bore the authority and thus became the judge, 
the father who punished (and the mother who intervened) and the 
father who taught us the rules of society and then demanded 
obedience. To the child the father is in many ways indistinguishable 
from society as a whole, just as the mother is nature itself. One of the 
painful moments of maturity for many people comes when they 
discover the limited humanity of their parents. 

In Freud’s scheme of the mental development of the mate the 
father and the rules of society become directly linked. The infant 
psyche demands constant satisfaction, particularly in its desires for 
food and physical pleasure from the mother. (Freudians may claim 
the child desires actual intercourse with its mother, but the situation 
holds even if the child seeks only the pleasure of being held against 
the mother’s body.) By interfering in the child’s relationship to its 
mother the father arouses the child's hostility, and for the still 























46 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


unrepressed infant, this means a desire to do away with the 
interference altogether. The urge to destroy the father, however, 
cannot be consummated or even recognized, and so the psyche, to 
relieve the terrible dilemma, identifies itself with the Father image, 
creating a ‘super-ego’ as a new guide for the self (replacing the ‘id’ - 
the urges and desires which led to such a crisis). But what form does 
this super-ego take? Precisely that of the rules of society, 
traditionally learned under the father’s guidance. 

Trumps 3 and 4 of the Tarot represent the parents in their 
archetypal roles. But just as the Empress signified the natural world, 
so the Emperor carries the wider significance of the social world 
‘married’ to nature. He symbolizes the laws of society, both good 
and bad, and the power that enforces them. 

In ancient times, where the Goddess reigned, the king performed 
a special function. New life can only come from death; therefore, 
each winter, the Goddess’s representatives sacrificed the old king, 
very often dismembering him and planting the pieces in the ground, 
thereby mystically fertilizing the earth. Later, when the male 
dominated religions took over, the king came to symbolize the rule of 
law which had clamped a lid of repression on what seemed to the 
patriarchs as the monstrous and chaotic darkness of the old order. 
We see this drama (much like Freud’s substitution of super-ego for 
id) in many myths; such as Marduk, national hero of Babylon, 
killing Tiamat, the original mother of creation, because she is giving 
birth to monsters. Whether or not we see the old ways as monstrous 
or the new as civilized, the Emperor symbolizes the abstraction of 
society replacing the direct experience of nature. 

In Rome, the concept of law versus chaos was carried to the point 
where stability, or ‘law and order’ to use the modern term, became 
virtues in themselves, apart from the inherent morality of those laws. 
No progress can be made in conditions of anarchy (runs the 
argument); bad laws need to be changed, but first the law must be 
obeyed at all costs. Any other approach can only destroy society. 
Today, we see this viewpoint embodied in an abstraction we call the 
‘system’. The Romans saw it more concretely in the personal figure 
of the Emperor, whom they described as the father of all his people. 

In the Emperor’s best aspect he indicates the stability of a just 
society that allows its members to pursue their personal needs and 
development. The natural world is chaotic; without some kind of 
social structure we could each spend all our lives fighting to survive. 
Society allows us both to work together and to benefit from the 
experience of those who lived before us. 

Stability allows spiritual development as well. In many countries 
society supports the churches (though whether this arrangement 




THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 47 

furthers spirituality is arguable); in some Eastern countries monks 
are free to pursue their studies because laymen fill their beggar 
bowls. Without this social custom they would have to spend their 
time working to get bread. 

In its more negative aspects the Emperor represents the power of 
unjust laws in a society where stability takes precedence over 
morality. Once we establish law and order as supreme then a 
corrupt ruler becomes a disaster. But if the entire system is corrupt, 
producing only bad rulers, then stability becomes the enemy of 
morality. The value of the symbol of the Emperor depends a very 
great deal on time and place. In an unjust society the Emperor’s 
power hinders, rather than helps, personal development. A great 
many people have gone to gaol for attacking unjust laws. 

Even at its best, however, the Emperor remains limited. Over the 
spontaneity of the Empress he has laid a network of repression. If we 
lose touch with our passions then life becomes cold and barren. The 
Rider pack Emperor (see fig. 5a) is drawn as old and stiff, dressed in 
iron, representing the sterility of a life rigidly governed by rules. The 
river which flowed so powerfully through the Empress’s garden has 
here become a thin stream, barely able to penetrate a lifeless desert. 

The card’s other symbolism reflects its dual aspects. He holds an 
ankh, Egyptian symbol of life, to indicate that under the law he bears 
the power of life and death, and will hopefully use it well. Four rams, 
symbols of Aries, adorn his throne while at the crown’s peak he 
bears the sign of Aries (unfortunately resembling a propellor). Now, 
Aries symbolizes force, aggression and war, but as the first sign of 
the zodiac it also signifies the new life of spring, which can emerge 
from the stability of a just society. 

As the middle card of the first line of the Major Arcana the 
Emperor represents a crucial test. In the process of growing up it is 
indeed the rules of society that many people find most difficult to 
surmount. We must absorb these rules, as well as our society’s 
traditions and beliefs, then go beyond them to find a personal code 
of conduct. This does not mean the attitude ‘rules are made to be 
broken’. People who feel compelled to flaunt all laws remain as 
bound to those laws as the person who follows them blindly. 

Because of the father’s role in teaching us acceptably social 
behaviour, people who are trapped at the level of the Emperor are 
often people who have never really accepted the ordinary humanity 
of their father. They may recognize it rationally but it disturbs and 
haunts them. Similar problems plague those people for whom the 
Empress remains their mother’s, rather than their own, passions 
and sensuality. 

The idea of the Emperor as that of the limited values of social 


48 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


structure arises mainly from Waite and his followers. The picture on 
the right at the start of this section, from Paul Foster Case’s Builders 
of the Adytum (BOTA) deck drawn by Jessie Burns Parke, illustrates 
another tradition. Here the Emperor symbolizes the sum total of 
spiritual knowledge. He is drawn in profile (this is much more 
common than the Rider pack full face image), linking them to the 
Qabalist image for God as the ‘Ancient of Days’, a seated king in 
profile. (The Ancient’s face was never visible, only his crown with a 
radiance beneath.) 

The Emperor’s arms and legs form an equilateral triangle over a 
cross, the alchemical sign for fire. This figure is later reversed (in 
Waite as well as Case) in the Hanged Man. As mentioned above, the 
crossed legs are an esoteric sign, found also on the card of the World. 
The BOTA Emperor sits on a cube rather than a throne. Also an 
esoteric symbol, the cube symbolizes both the world and the Tarot 
itself, as well as the Hebrew alphabet and the paths of the Tree of Life. 
The symbolism arises from the fact that a cube contains twelve edges, 
six faces, three axes, and of course a centre, adding up to twenty-two, 
the number of trumps, Hebrew letters, and paths. And because the 
Tree of Life is held to represent all creation the cube symbolizes the 
universe. 

In readings the Emperor indicates (following the Rider pack 
image) the power of society, its laws and especially its authority to 
enforce those laws. The appearance of the trump indicates an 
encounter with the law. Again, the good or bad qualities depend on 
the context. 

More personally the Emperor can signify a time of stability and 
order in a person’s life, hopefully opening up creative energy. He also 
can indicate a specific person who holds great power, either objective 
or emotional, over the subject. This is very often the father, but it can 
also be a husband or lover, especially for those people who treat their 
lovers as substitute fathers to whom they surrender control of their 
lives. I have seen readings so dominated by the Emperor that all of 
life’s possibilities become stunted and unfulfilled. 

Like the Empress reversed, the Emperor, when upside down, 
receives those elements complementary to his qualities when he is the 
right way up. He is, in Waite’s terms, ‘benevolence and compassion’; 
new life in a stony desert. But the pendulum can swing too far. The 
reversed Emperor can signify immaturity, and the inability to make 
harsh decisions and carry them through. 




THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 


49 



(a) 


Figure 6 


(b) 


The Hierophant 

In most Tarot decks trump 5 is called either the Pope or the High 
Priest, terms which connect it by name as well as picture to trump 2, 
the archetype of inner truth. Waite wrote that he rejected ‘Pope’ 
because the title suggested a very specific example of the trump’s 
general idea. The name ‘Hierophant’ belonged to the high priest of 
the Greek Eleusinian mysteries. Now, Waite describes his card as 
symbolizing the ‘outer way’ of churches and dogma. But his use of 
the mystery term suggests another interpretation, one more 
favoured by those who see the Tarot as a secret doctrine of occult 
practices rather than a more general embodiment of human 
patterns. This interpretation is dramatically portrayed in the 
picture of the Hierophant from Aleister Crowley’s Book of Thoth , 
drawn by Frieda Harris. Here the trump signifies initiation into a 
secret doctrine, such as the various orders and lodges which 
flourished around the turn of the century and which have under¬ 
gone a revival in England and America. The Order of the Golden 
Dawn, to which Waite and Crowley at one time both belonged, 
possibly originated the term ‘Hierophant’ for trump 5. 

These two meanings, ‘outer way’ and ‘secret doctrine’, appear 
contradictory on the most elementary level. In reality they are very 
similar. Whether the two acolytes are being admitted to the Church 















50 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


or to an occult society, they are still entering a doctrine, with a set of 
beliefs which they must learn and accept before they can gain 
entrance. There is of course a fundamental difference between say, 
the catechism and the rituals of the Golden Dawn. For both, 
however, the trump indicates an education and a tradition. 
Therefore, if we see the first line as describing the development of 
the personality then the Hierophant, coming after the natural world 
and society, indicates the intellectual tradition of the person’s 
particular society, and his or her education in that tradition. 

Following Waite’s interpretation (and thinking specifically of the 
Western pope) we can see the Hierophant as a companion to the 
Emperor. The word ‘pope means ‘father’, and like the Roman 
Emperor the Pope is seen as a wise father guiding his children. 
Together, they share responsibility for humanity, the one providing 
physical needs, the other guiding spiritual growth. In one of the 
earliest treatises urging separation of Church and State, Dant? 
argued that the two functions must not be combined for fear of 
corruption. However, he never questioned the idea that the Church 
is responsible for our souls. 

Today, many people do not understand the basic idea of a 
priesthood. Our democratic age rejects the notions of an 
intermediary between an individual and God. Note, however, that 
the Hierophant can also symbolize the ‘dictatorship of the 
proletariat’ or any other 61ite leading the masses where they cannot 
go themselves. Originally the special function of the priests was 
evident; they spoke to the gods through the oracles, an often 
terrifying practice, and most people quite happily let someone else 
do it for them. When Christianity rejected such graphic and 
immediate connection to God, the idea of the priest became, like the 
Emperor, more abstract. Basically it depends on the notion that 
most people do not really care much about God. The average person 
is happiest following worldly pursuits, money, family and politics. 
There are, however, certain people who, by temperament, feel very 
directly the spirit that runs through all our lives. Called to the 
priesthood by their own inner awareness, these people can speak to 
God for us. More important, they can speak to us, interpreting God’s 
law so we may live proper lives, and eventually, after death, receive 
our reward of returning to God. After the resurrection we ourselves 
will dwell in sight of God. In life, however, we need the priests to 
guide us. 

So runs the argument. Even if we agree with the principle, in 
practice it tends to break down. People become priests for all sorts of 
reasons - ambition, family pressure, etc. - while those who do feel a 
genuine calling to communicate with God may show very little 



THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 51 

talent for communicating with people. Moreover, like the social 
institutions of the Emperor, the religious institutions of the 
Hierophant can easily become corrupted by the authority given 
them, so that the priests see their power as an end in itself, prizing 
obedience above enlightenment. Obviously, the position of 
defending a doctrine will attract doctrinaire people. 

Perhaps, however, we reject the idea of a guiding priesthood for a 
more subtle reason. Ever since the Reformation a notion that has 
gained greater and greater force in the West is that of the 
individual’s ultimate responsibility for him or herself. The whole 
idea of an outer doctrine, a code of rules and beliefs accepted on 
faith, depends on the assumption that most people prefer to have 
someone else tell them what to do and think. This may very well be 
true. To really discover God inside yourself you must undergo some 
uncomfortable confrontations with your own psyche. Similarly, to 
decide for yourself what is the moral thing to do in all situations 
might require a constant agony of choice. Nevertheless, many people 
today simply cannot accept either society or a Church bearing the 
ultimate responsibility for their lives. 

Perhaps the interpretation of the Hierophant as representing 
secret doctrines suits our age better. For then the doctrine does not 
tell us what to do, but instead gives us direction to begin working on 
ourselves. And the Tarot, as we saw with the Magician, sets itself 
against all Churches by leading us to personal salvation in this life. 
For Crowley the Hierophant represents initiation as the means 
through which the individual becomes united with the universe. The 
form and doctrine of the initiation change with each world age; 
having lasted nearly two thousand years, the current Piscean Age is 
coming to a close, so that the Hierophant is due to change, as will all 
strictly human relationships. Crowley comments that only the 
future can tell us what the new ‘current of initiation’ will be. But the 
basic quality of initiation as a merging with the cosmos always 
remains the same. 

In the BOTA version of the Hierophant (as in the Rider pack) the 
crossed keys at the Hierophant’s feet are gold and silver, 
representing the outer and inner ways, the sun and moon, the 
Magician and the High Priestess, which the doctrine teaches us to 
combine. In the Rider pack card both keys are gold, indicating that 
the dark side is hidden from those who follow the outer doctrine. 

In the Waite-Smith imagery no veil blocks the entrance to the 
Church, as in the temple of the High Priestess. But the pillars are a 
dull grey. Those who enter here may receive protection from 
personal choice, but they will not pierce the secrets of duality. The 
unconscious remains closed. In many Tarot decks, the High 


52 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Priestess holds not a scroll but a small book, locked. And the keys of 
the Hierophant do not fit that tantalizing lock. 

Still, we must not think that the outer doctrine of religion serves 
no purpose to the seeker. Like the general education, of which it is a 
particular example, it gives the individual a firm tradition in which 
to root his or her personal development. The modern Western 
phenomenon of a kind of eclectic mysticism, drawing inspiration 
from all religions, is an extremely unusual development. This is 
based, possibly, on global awareness plus the view of religion as a 
psychological state divorced from science and history. Thus we see 
religion as an experience rather than an explanation of the universe 
and accept that all religious experiences are valid, whatever 
contradictions they show on the surface. While this idea opens great 
possibilities, many people have noted its potential shallowness. The 
fact is, throughout the centuries, the great mystics have always 
spoken from deep within a tradition. The Qabalists were thoroughly 
Jewish, Thomas k Kempis a complete Christian, and the Sufis 
bowed to Mecca with all other orthodox Muslims. In its best aspect 
the Hierophant (as outer doctrine) can give us a place to start in 
creating a personal awareness of God. 

One further aspect of the card’s symbolism deserves special 
attention. The position of the three people (that is, a large figure 
presiding over two smaller ones on either side) introduces a motif 
that repeats itself, like the two pillars of the High Priestess, 
throughout the Major Arcana, and is resolved in Judgement and the 
world. The very next two cards after trump 5 repeat the motif, with 
the angel over the Lovers, and the charioteer of the Chariot over the 
black and white sphinxes. 

We can see this trio as an emblem of the idea of a triad, such as 
the Christian trinity, or the triune picture of the mind: the 
id/ego/super-ego of Freud, or the unconscious/conscious/super¬ 
conscious of the three lines of the Major Arcana. To understand the 
meaning of the image we must return to the High Priestess. She sits 
between two pillars symbolizing the dualities of life. She herself 
signifies one side, the Magician the other. The Hierophant initiates 
two acolytes into his church. We see, therefore, that the Hierophant 
and the Lovers and the Chariot all represent attempts to mediate 
between the opposing poles of life and find some way, not to resolve 
them, but simply to hold them in balance. A religious doctrine, with 
its moral codes and explanations for life’s most basic questions, does 
just that. If we surrender ourselves to a Church the contradictions of 
life all become answered; but not resolved. 

In readings the card signifies Churches, doctrines, and education 
in general. Psychologically it can indicate orthodoxy, conformity to 



THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 53 

society’s ideas and codes of behaviour, as well as, more subtly, a 
surrender of responsibility. The Emperor symbolized the rules 
themselves and their official enforcers; the Hierophant indicates our 
own inner sense of obedience. Reversed, the card means 
unorthodoxy, especially mental - forming original ideas. It can also, 
however, mean gullibility and this idea suggests another virtue of the 
card when it is the right way up. A society builds its intellectual 
tradition over hundreds of years. Those who accept that tradition 
receive from it a standard by which to judge new ideas and 
information. Those who reject it must find their own ways and can 
easily get lost in superficial ideas. There are many people who, 
having given up the dogma forced on them as children, fall into some 
new dogma, a cult or some extremist political group, just as rigid 
and perhaps more shallow. Having rejected tradition they have not 
really rejected the Hierophant. They have not accepted the 
responsibility of truly finding their own way. 



(a) Figure 7 (b) 


The Lovers 

Of the various changes Arthur Waite and Pamela Smith made in 
traditional Tarot designs the card of the Lovers remains the most 
dramatic. Where the Tarot de Marseilles (on the right, above) 
shows a young man struck by Cupid’s arrow and forced to choose 
between two women, the Rider pack shows a mature man and a 











54 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


single woman presided over by an angel. Further, while most decks 
indicate only a social situation; the Rider pack image clearly 
suggests the Garden of Eden, or rather, a new Garden of Eden, with 
the trees bringing enlightenment rather than the Fall. 

The earlier version of trump 6 sometimes bears the title 'The 
Choice’, and in divinatory readings means an important choice 
between two desires. Because one woman is fair and the other dark, a 
symbolism traditional in Europe where darkness always indicates 
evil and women in general indicate temptation, the choice was seen 
as between something respectable but perhaps dull, and something 
greatly desired but morally improper. The card can refer to a minor 
choice or even to a major crisis in a person’s life. We see this ancient 
symbolism today in the various novels and films of middle-aged, 
middle class men tempted to give up their loved but rather boring 
wives for a younger ‘wilder’ woman. 

The choice can, in fact, extend to a person’s whole life. Even those 
people who never question the boundaries of their middle class 
respectability have made a choice as much as the life-long criminal. 
And there are many people who outwardly live socially acceptable 
lives yet inwardly fight constant torments of desire, fighting urges to 
adultery, or violence, or simply a desire to leave home and become a 
wandering tramp. 

On the esoteric level the choice between the light and dark woman 
indicates the choice between the outer path (symbolized in the 
Rider pack by the Hierophant), where your life is laid out for you, 
and the inner path of the occultist, which can lead to a confrontation 
with your hidden desires. The Church labelled magicians as devil 
worshippers, and in Christian allegories the dark woman usually 
stood for Satan. 

These meanings all see the choice between light and dark in the 
widest possible terms. In the context of the first line of trumps we 
can see it in a much more specific way, that of the first real choice a 
person makes independently of his or her parents. Until the sexual 
urge rouses itself most people are content to act out their parents’ 
expectations for them. The sexual urge, however, points us where it 
wants to go. As a result we begin to break away in other areas as 
well. It is very rare that the partners our parents would choose for us 
are the ones we would choose for ourselves. If the difference is too 
extreme, or the parents too controlling, then the person can face a 
painful choice. 

Paul Douglas has commented that the darkhaired woman, who 
appears much older, is the boy’s mother, and the choice is whether 
to stay under her protection or strike out on his own. Those who 





55 


THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 

believe, with Freud, that a boy’s first desire is directed towards his 
mother will see here a classic Oedipal dilemma. One part of the 
personality wishes to maintain the hidden fantasy life of a union 
with the mother, while another wishes to find a true love in the 
reality of the boy’s own generation. But we do not have to accept the 
Freudian doctrine to see the wider implications of this choice. 
Whether or not the boy secretly desires his mother the life lived 
under the parents’ protection is safe and comfortable. But he (or 
she, for girls basically face the same questions, though sometimes in 
different forms) can never become a true individual without making 
a break. And nothing indicates this more strongly than sexuality. 

Therefore, the traditional version of trump 6 represents 
adolescence. Not only does sexuality emerge at this time but also 
intellectual and moral independence. Cards 3, 4, and 5 represented 
us as shaped by the great forces of nature, society, and parents. In 
card 6 the individual emerges, a true personality with its own ideas 
and purposes, able to make important choices based, not on 
parental orders, but on its own assessment of desires and 
responsibilities. 

These meanings belong to the card’s traditional structure. In 
designing his own version of the Lovers Waite addressed a different 
question. What functions do sex and love ultimately serve in a 
person’s life? And what deep meanings can we find in the powerful 
drama of two people joining their hearts and bodies? Waite called 
his picture, ‘the card of human love, here exhibited as part of the 
way, the truth, and the life’. 

The sexual drive leads us away from isolation. It pushes us to 
form vital relationships with other people, and finally opens the way 
to love. Through love we not only achieve a unity with someone else, 
but we are given a glimpse of the greater meanings and deeper 
significance of life. In love we give up part of that ego control which 
isolates us not only from other people but from life itself. Therefore 
the angel appears above the man’s and woman’s heads, a vision 
unobtainable to each person individually, but glimpsed by both of 
them together. 

Religion, philosophy, and art have always seized on the 
symbolism of male and female as representing duality. We have 
already seen this idea reflected in the Magician and the High 
Priestess, as well as the Empress and the Emperor. The symbolism 
here is reinforced by the fact that the Tree of Life, with its Magician 
like flames, stands behind the man, while the Tree of Knowledge, 
entwined with the serpent (symbol not of evil but of unconscious 
wisdom) stands behind the woman. The angel unites these two 


56 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


principles. In traditional teachings men and women are held to 
contain, within their bodies, separate life principles. Through 
physical love these principles join together. 

Occultists, however, have always recognized both these elements 
within the self. Today we hear many people say that everyone 
contains both male and female qualities; usually, however, they are 
referring to vague ideas of social behaviour, such as aggression and 
gentleness. When male and female were seen as opposite in their 
deepest natures the occultist view was much more radical. One way 
of describing the goal of the Major Arcana is to say it brings out and 
unites the male and female principles. Therefore, in many decks, the 
dancer in the World is an hermaphrodite. 

According to Qabalists and Hermetic philosophers all humanity 
(and indeed, even the Deity) was originally hermaphroditic; male 
and female became separated only as a consequence of the Fall. 
Thus, on the outer level, each of us is only half a person and only 
through love can we find a sense of unity. 

We find this same idea in Plato, but with an interesting variation. 
One of the Platonic myths states that humans were originally double 
creatures, but of three kinds: male-female, male-male, and female- 
female. Believing that humans possessed too much power Zeus split 
them with a thunderbolt, and now each one of us is looking for his or 
her other half. In contrast to the Jewish and Christian myths Plato’s 
story gives equal reality to homosexuals. It reminds us of the danger 
in the too easy symbolism of male and female as ultimate opposites. 
The Magician and the High Priestess are mixed very subtly in each 
of us. And the angel can be evoked by any two lovers. It is not the 
roles that matter, but the reality of the union. 

In the usual Christian interpretation of Genesis Eve bears the 
greater guilt, not only because she ate first, but because her 
sensuality tempted Adam to fall. Man supposedly was ruled by 
reason and woman by desire. This split led some Christians to 
declare that women had no souls. The whole myth of the Fall, 
however, with its emphasis on disobedience and punishment, is 
really meant to serve a repressive morality. Physical passions were 
seen as dangerous to society and therefore had to be controlled. As 
Joseph Campbell points out in The Masks of God the ancient goddess 
religion of Palestine contained the same drama of a serpent, a Tree 
of Life, and an apple. But in the old story the initiate was given the 
apple by the goddess to allow him to enter paradise, rather than it 
being the cause of his expulsion. The ancient Hebrews reversed the 
myth, partly as a way of branding the old religion as evil, but also 
because they, like the Babylonians, considered the old ways 
‘monstrous’. 



57 


THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 

The Tarot, however, is a path of liberation. The fear that Jahweh 
expresses, that human beings ‘will become like us’, is precisely the 
Tarot’s purpose - to fully bring out the divine spark in us and unite 
it with our conscious selves, to end the duality of God and human 
and make them one. Therefore, though it keeps much of the same 
symbolism as Genesis, the Rider pack Lovers subtly reverses the 
meaning. 

Notice that while the man looks at the woman the woman looks at 
the angel. If the male is indeed reason, then rationality can only 
reach beyond its limits through the medium of passion. By its nature 
reason controls and contains, while passion tends to break down all 
limits. Our tradition has set the body and the rational mind at odds 
with each other. The Tarot teaches us that we must unite them (a 
single mountain rises between the two lovers) and that it is not the 
controlling power of reason that raises the senses to a higher level, 
but, rather, the other way around. 

We can see this in direct psychological terms. Most people are 
bound within their egos or the masks they present to the world. But 
if they can surrender to sexual passion, they can, at least for a 
moment, transcend their isolation. Those who cannot release their 
egos, even for an instant, misuse sex, and are misused by it. Sex 
becomes a means of gaining power over someone else, but it never 
satisfies. When a person rejects the body’s desire to release itself 
with another person the result is depression. The angel has been 
denied. 

At the same time the passions alone cannot bring us to the angel. 
They need to be guided by the reason as much as the reason needs 
the passions to set it free. Those who simply go wherever their 
desires lead them are often thrown from one experience to another. 

Paul Foster Case names the angel as Raphael, who presides over 
the super-conscious. This brings us back to the triune mind; here we 
learn that the three levels of the mind are not separate and isolated, 
like the three stories of a house, but that the super-conscious is 
actually a product of the conscious and unconscious joined together. 
The pathway lies through the unconscious because that is where we 
find the true energy of life. In fact, the super-conscious can be 
described as the energy of the unconscious brought out and 
transformed to a higher state. Part of that transformation lies in 
consciousness giving the energy form, direction, and meaning. 

If in the triangular motif the two figures below represent the 
dualities of life, while the larger figure above symbolizes a mediating 
force between them, then in trump 6 the mediator is sexual love. 
When we surrender to it we experience a glimpse of something 
greater than ourselves. Only a glimpse, and only for a moment; true 


58 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


liberation requires finally a great deal more than passion. But love 
can help us see the path, and know a little of the joy that waits for us 
at the end of it. A number of mystics, notably Saint Teresa, have 
described union with God in terms of sexual ecstasy. 

The divinatory meanings for the Waite-Smith image are 
straightforward. They refer to the importance of love in a person’s 
life and to a specific lover; very often to marriage or a long 
relationship. The card implies that the particular relationship has 
been or will prove to be very valuable to the person, leading him or 
her to a new understanding of life. If some specific problem is being 
considered in the reading then the Lovers indicates help in some 
way, either practically through the lover’s assistance, or through 
emotional support. But this is not always true. The Lovers, in the 
position of the past, especially in relation to cards indicating a 
refusal to look at the present situation, can indicate a crippling 
nostalgia for a past love. 

The earlier cards all represented archetypes. When we reversed 
them we added the missing elements. But here the individual has 
advanced and now the reversed meaning shows weakness and 
blocks. It is first of all a destructive love, particularly in a bad 
marriage. It can refer to romantic or sexual problems that dominate 
a person’s life, either from difficulties with a specific person, or 
because the person finds love simply a great problem. Because the 
Waite-Smith picture indicates a mature love, and the traditional 
image shows the process of adolescent choice, either version reversed 
indicates romantic immaturity; the prolonged adolescence that 
keeps some people involved in childish fantasies long after their 
bodies have fully matured. 




THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 59 



Figure 8 


The Chariot 

The earlier versions of this card, which showed the Chariot pulled 
by two horses rather than two sphinxes, derives from a number of 
historical and mythological sources. Primarily it comes out of the 
processions given in Rome and other places for a conquering hero, 
when his chariot carried him through the streets that were filled 
with cheering citizens. The custom apparently answers some deep 
psychic need for group participation. We still practice it today, two 
thousand years later, in the parades given to presidents, generals, 
and astronauts, with open limousines replacing the chariot. 

The Chariot implies more than a greater victory. To drive a two 
horse vehicle at speed requires total control over the animals; the 
activity serves as a perfect vehicle for the powerful will. Plato, in the 
Phaedrus, refers to the mind as a chariot drawn by a black and white 
horse, the exact image of the Tarot. 

A certain Hindu myth tells of Shiva destroying a triple city of the 
demons. To do so he requires that all creation be subordinated to his 
will. The gods make a chariot for Shiva, using not only themselves 
but the heavens and the Earth as materials. The sun and moon 
become the wheels and the winds the horses. (The symbol on the 
front of the Tarot Chariot, like a nut and bolt, or a wheel and axle, is 
called the lingam and yoni, standing for Shiva, the masculine 













60 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


principle, and Parvati, the feminine principle, united in a single 
figure.) Through the myth’s images we learn that spiritual victory- 
over evil comes when we can focus all of nature, as well as the 
unconscious energy embodied in Shiva himself, through the 
conscious will. 

These two fables show two different aspects of the idea of will. 
The story of Shiva speaks of a true victory, in which the spirit has 
found a focus to release its total force. But the Phaedrus gives us an 
image of the triumphant ego, which controls rather than resolves the 
basic conflicts of life. Those Tarot commentators who see the cards 
as a group of separate images, each one contributing some vital 
lesson to our spiritual understanding, tend to give the Chariot its 
wider meaning. They point out that the Qabalistic title for the 
number 7, with all its mystic connotations, is ‘Victory’. 

In many places, particularly India, the horse became associated 
with death and funerals. When the rising patriarchy abolished the 
ritual sacrifice of the king, a horse was killed instead. The horse 
sacrifice became the most holy, associated with immortality. Even 
today, horses are used to pull the coffins of great leaders. (A bizarre 
junction of two aspects of the Chariot was seen in the death of John 
Kennedy. He was killed in his limousine during a parade, and then a 
horse - who rebelled against his trainer’s control - pulled his coffin 
in the state funeral.) These connections suggest the idea of the soul’s 
victory over mortality. 

When we look at the cards sequentially we see that 7 is only the 
victory of the first line of the Major Arcana. It crowns that line’s 
process of maturation, but by necessity it cannot address the great 
areas of the unconscious and super-conscious. Seen this way the 
Chariot shows us the developed ego; the lessons of the early cards 
have been absorbed, the adolescent period of searching and self- 
creation has been passed, and now we see the mature adult, 
successful in life, admired by others, confident and content with 
himself, able to control feelings, and above all, to direct the will. 

Like the Magician the Charioteer carries a magic wand. Unlike 
the Magician he does not raise it above his head to heaven. His 
power is subordinate to his will. His hands hold no reins. His strong 
character alone controls the opposing forces in life. 

The lingam and yoni indicate his mature sexuality which is under 
his control. Thus he is not the victim of his emotions and his 
sexuality contributes to a satisfying life. The glowing square on his 
chest, a symbol of vibrant nature, links him to the sensual world of 
the Empress, but the eight pointed star on his crown shows his 
mental energy directing his passions (symbolists consider the eight 
pointed star as halfway between the square of the material world 



61 


THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 

and the circle of the spiritual). His chariot looms larger than the 
town behind indicating that his will is more powerful than the rules 
of society. However, the fact that his chariot is not in motion 
indicates that he is not a rebel. The wheels of the chariot rest on 
water, showing that he draws energy from the unconscious, though 
the chariot itself, resting on land, separates him from a direct 
contact with that great force. 

We have mentioned the sexual symbolism of the lingam and yoni. 
While Hindu myth connects horses to death, Freudian dream 
symbolism connects them to the sexual energy of the libido. By 
controlling the horses (or sphinxes) the Charioteer controls his 
instinctive desires. 

Various magic signs adorn his body. His skirt bears symbols of 
ceremonial magic, his belt shows the sign and planets. The two 
lunar faces on his shoulders are named ‘Urin and Thummim’, the 
supposed shoulder plates of the High Priest in Jerusalem and which 
therefore suggest the Hierophant. At the same time the lunar plates 
refer to the High Priestess. Note also that the cloth at the back of the 
chariot suggests the High Priestess’s veil; he has set the mystery of 
the unconscious behind him. 

We see, therefore, in the Chariot’s symbolism all the previous 
cards of the first line. The wand and symbols indicate the Magician, 
the water, sphinxes, and veil symbolize the High Priestess, the 
square and green earth symbolize the Empress, the city symbolizes 
the Emperor, the shoulder plates symbolize the Hierophant, and the 
lingam and yoni symbolize the Lovers. All these forces contribute to 
the outer personality. 

And yet - observe the Chariot with its stone-like qualities. 
Observe the charioteer himself merging into his stone vehicle. The 
mind that subordinates all things to conscious will runs the risk of 
becoming rigid, cut off from the very forces it has learned to control. 
Observe also that the black and white sphinxes are not reconciled to 
each other. They look in opposite directions. The charioteer’s will 
holds them together in a tense balance. If that will should fail, the 
Chariot and its rider will be torn apart. 

Paul Douglas has compared the Chariot to Jung’s idea of the 
‘persona’. As we grow up we create a kind of mask to deal with the 
outside world. If we have dealt successfully with the various 
challenges of life, then the different aspects symbolized by the other 
cards will become integrated into this ego-mask. But we can too 
easily confuse this successful persona with the true self, even to the 
point that if we try to discard the mask we will fear its loss as a kind 
of death. This is why the second line of the Major Arcana, which 
deals precisely with the release of the self from its outer masks, 


62 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

bears Death as its next to last card. 

So far we have considered the Chariot as an emblem of personal 
maturity. But the idea of human will extends beyond the individual. 
With its images of the mind subduing and utilizing the forces of life 
the Chariot is a perfect symbol for civilization, which creates order 
out of the chaos of nature by using the natural world as the raw 
materials for its agriculture and cities. One of the chief Qabalistic 
connotations for the card extends this idea. By its connection with 
the Hebrew letter ‘Iain’ the Chariot carries the quality of‘speech’. 
Speech has always seemed to humans to represent the rational mind 
and its dominance over nature. As far as we know only humans 
possess language (though chimpanzees have shown themselves 
capable of learning human sign language, and whales and dolphins 
may possess developed languages of their own) and we may say that 
speech separates us from the animal. Adam gained control over the 
beasts in Eden by speaking their names. Most important, humans 
use language to transmit the information that allows civilization to 
continue. 

However, just as the ego is limited, so is speech. First of all, speech 
restricts our experience of reality. By forming a description of the 
world, by giving everything a label, we erect a barrier between 
ourselves and experience. When we look at a tree, we do not feel the 
impact of a living organism; rather, we think 'tree' and move on. 
The label has replaced the thing itself. Also, by relying too much on 
this rational quality of language we ignore experiences that cannot 
be expressed in words. We have already seen how the High Priestess 
signifies intuitive wisdom beyond language. Certain experiences, 
especially mystical union with spirit, cannot be described. Language 
can only hint at them with metaphors and fables. People who rely 
totally on speech have even gone so far as to insist that non-verbal 
experiences, or experiences which cannot be measured by 
psychological tests, do not exist. This is simply because they cannot 
be scientifically described. Such dogmatism receives its perfect 
symbol in the charioteer’s merging with his stone wagon. 

So far we have considered every symbol in the picture except, 
perhaps, the most obvious one: the two sphinxes. Waite borrowed 
this innovation from Eliphas L£vi, the great pioneer of Qabalistic 
Tarot. Like the two pillars of the High Priestess, or the black and 
white horses they replace, the sphinxes signify the dualities and 
contradictions of life. Once again, we see the triangular motif. Here 
the mediating force is will-power. 

The use of sphinxes instead of horses suggests several deeper 
meanings. The sphinx in Greek legend was a riddler, presenting the 
mystery of life to the people of Thebes. The myth tells us that the 



63 


THE WORLDLY SEQUENCE 

sphinx siezed the young men of the city and asked them the 
following riddle: ‘What creature walks on four legs in the morning, 
two legs at noon, and three legs in the evening?’ Those who could 
not answer were devoured. Now, the answer is ‘man’ who crawls as 
a baby, walks upright as an adult, and uses a cane in old age. The 
implication is clear. If you do not understand your basic humanity, 
with its strengths and weaknesses, then life will destroy you. The 
Chariot symbolizes maturity, accepting the limits of life, plus the 
faculty of speech, that is, rational understanding, which is used to 
define existence and therefore to control it. 

But a further meaning lurks here. The man who answered the 
sphinx’s riddle was Oedipus, who arrived in Thebes after killing his 
father. Freud’s emphasis on incest has diverted attention from the 
deeper message of the Oedipus story. Oedipus was the perfect image 
of the successful man. Not only did he save Thebes from a menace 
and become king of the city but he did so by his understanding of 
life. He knew what man was. Yet he did not know himself. His own 
inner reality remained closed to him until the gods forced him to 
confront it. And the gods did force him. If the oracles had not spoken 
first to his father and then to him, Oedipus would never have done 
the things he did. Therefore, though he understood the outer 
meaning of man’s life he did not understand either who he really 
was, or his relation to the gods who controlled his life. And these two 
subjects are precisely the concerns of the second and third lines of 
the Major Arcana. In the second we go beyond the ego to find the 
true self. In the third we deal openiy with the archetypal forces of 
existence and reach at last a full integration of those dualities which 
the charioteer was able to dominate but never reconcile. 

The divinatory meanings of the Chariot derive from its powerful 
will. In a reading the card signifies that the person is successfully 
controlling some situation through the force of his or her 
personality. The card implies that a situation contains some 
contradictions and that these have not been brought together but 
simply held under control. This is not to stress too highly the 
negative undertones of the card. When it is the right way up the 
Chariot basically means success; the personality in charge of the 
world around it. If it appears as the outcome in a reading dealing 
with problems then it indicates victory-. 

Reversed, the card’s inherent contradictions gain greater force. 
The Chariot upside down implies that the approach of will-power 
has proven unsuccessful, and the situation has got out of control. 
Unless the person can find some other approach to the difficulties, 
he or she faces disaster. Will-power alone cannot always sustain us. 
Like Oedipus we must sometimes learn to give way to the gods. 


I 


Chapter 5 . 

Turning Inwards 

The Search for Self-knowledge 

ith the second line of the Major Arcana we move from 
the outer world and its challenges to the inner self. 
The contradictions concealed in the Chariot’s 
powerful image must now be faced openly. The mask 
of ego must die. 

Dramatic as it sounds this situation is actually very common, at 
least in the need if not the fulfilment. Self-questioning and searching 
have long been seen as features of middle age. When people are 
young they are concerned mainly with victory over the forces of life, 
finding a partner and achieving success. When success has been 
found, however, people may wonder about the value of it. The 
question, ‘Who am I beneath all my possessions, beneath all the 
images I present to other people?’ takes on more and more 
importance. Today, many younger people are not waiting for 
middle-age and success to ask these things. A characteristic of our 
time is the desire for life to have a sense of meaning, of inner essence. 
And more and more people are deciding that the first place to look 
for such meaning is within themselves. 

This idea, in fact, is only a half-truth. The Magician teaches us 
that, as physical beings, we find reality only in connection with the 
outer world; the inner truth of the High Priestess is a potential and 
must be manifested through the consciousness of the Magician. But 
as long as our masks and habits and defences close us off from self- 
knowledge so that we never know why we act, then all the things we 
do remain meaningless. The flow between the Magician and the 
High Priestess needs to be free for life to possess value. 

Because the line basically reverses the emphasis of the first seven 
cards, many of the cards appear as mirror images to the ones above 
them. The sexual polarity of trumps 1 and 2 become turned around 



TURNING INWARDS 


65 


in Strength and the Hermit, while the principle of light and dark, 
outer and inner, remain in the same positions. The Wheel of 
Fortune turns away from the natural and mindless world of the 
Empress to a vision of inner mysteries. At the end of the line 
Temperance shows us a new kind of victory. The Chariot’s force has 
been replaced by balance and calm. W'here the charioteer’s stone 
chariot removed him from direct contact with the earth and the 
river, the angel of Temperance stands with one foot on land, one in 
water, showing the personality in harmony with itself and life. 

Another theme appears in the second line. So far the cards have 
presented a series of lessons to us, things we must learn about life to 
become mature and successful in the outer world. But enlighten¬ 
ment is a deeply personal experience. It cannot be studied or even 
pondered but only lived. The series of outer lessons culminate in the 
Wheel of Fortune which shows us a vision of the world and ourselves 
which must be answered. The Hanged Man, however, shows 
something else entirely. Here we see, not a lesson, but the image of 
enlightenment itself, the outer personality turned upside down by a 
very- real and personal experience. 

In between these two cards, and at the exact centre of the whole 
Major Arcana, lies Justice, carefully balancing the scales between 
inner and outer, past and future, rationality and intuition, 
knowledge and experience. 







66 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Strength 

Waite’s change of the Lovers was the most obvious of his Tarot 
alterations; his switch of Strength with Justice remains the most 
controversial. He himself gives no real reason for the change. ‘For 
reasons which satisfy myself, this card has been interchanged with 
that of Justice, which is usually numbered eight. As the variation 
carries nothing which will signify to the reader there is no cause for 
explanation.’ The reasons are certainly more than personal. Not 
only Waite but Paul Foster Case and Aleister Crowley placed 
Strength as 8 and Justice as 11. Probably they all followed the Order 
of the Golden Dawn, whose secret Tarot deck also switched the two 
cards. 

This connection to a secret order suggests the idea of initiation. 
Now, the Golden Dawn, of course, did not originate the practice of 
initiation, though it claimed to receive its specific rituals directly 
from spirit instructors. Initiation goes back thousands of years and is 
seen all over the world, from Egyptian temples to the Australian 
desert. It represents a special means of psychological transformation 
- the very subject of the Tarot’s middle line. By referring Justice and 
the cards around it to this ancient idea we gain a wider under¬ 
standing of the Tarot as an experience. 



TURNING INWARDS 


67 


It is worth considering the implications of the old arrangement of 
trumps. The image of Justice suggests weighing your life in the 
balance. The second line takes us away from the outer achievements 
of the first and into the self. Thus Justice in the first position would 
mean an assessment of what your life has meant to you, followed by 
a decision to search inward for greater meaning. Obviously, this fits 
very nicely. But if Justice comes first then all these things occur 
rationally; the assessment arises as a conscious reaction to 
dissatisfaction. How much more powerful this assessment appears 
when it arises from within, forced on us by the powerful vision of the 
Wheel of Fortune. The double-edged sword of Justice implies 
action, a response to the knowledge gained in the assessment. The 
idea of response leads directly to the Hanged Man. If Justice came 
first then the Hermit would follow it. As a seeker of wisdom the 
Hermit would also represent a valid response to Justice. But again, if 
we allow that wisdom to come before Justice, then the Hanged Man 
shows a response from deep inside. 

Now consider Strength in both places. The picture shows a 
woman taming a lion. Briefly, the image suggests the energy of the 
unconscious released and calmed, ‘tamed’ by the direction of 
conscious understanding. Such an idea would easily belong in the 
middle position. We would then describe the card as the central test 
of the whole line. And certainly the peacefulness and great reversal 
of the Hanged Man would follow Strength perfectly. 

But we can also see Strength as the qualities vital for beginning 
the line. The search inward cannot be accomplished by the ego. We 
need to confront feelings and desires long hidden from our conscious 
thoughts. If we attempt to transform ourselves by a wholly rational 
process we create another kind of persona. Something very like this 
in fact happens quite often. Many people feel a lack of spontaneity in 
their lives. They look around them or read books on psychology, and 
observe, with a certain jealousy, or even shame at their own 
repressions, the characteristics of spontaneous people. And then, 
rather than follow the fearful process of releasing their hidden fears 
and desires, they carefully imitate spontaneity. They have extended 
the Chariot to a new domain. 

By making Strength number 8 we set it against the Chariot, as a 
different kind of power, not the ego’s will, but the inner Strength to 
confront yourself calmly and without fear. The mysteries can be 
brought out because we have found the Strength to face them. The 
lion signifies all the feelings, fears, desires, and confusions 
suppressed by the ego in its attempt to control life. The charioteer 
drew upon his inner feelings as a source of energy, but was always 


68 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


careful to direct that energy where he consciously decided it should 
go. Strength allows the inner passions to emerge, as the first step in 
going beyond the ego. 

On a very simple level we can see this emergence of suppressed 
feelings in the person who allows him or herself to act ‘childishly’, to 
weep or scream; in short, to do all those things that previously 
seemed foolish or embarrassing. On a deeper level the lion 
symbolizes the whole force of personality, usually smoothed over by 
the demands of civilized life. Strength releases this energy in order to 
use it as a kind of fuel, propelling us along the inner path of the 
Hermit. This purpose can only be accomplished because the lion is 
‘tamed’ at the same time that it is released. Strength opens up the 
personality like Pandora opening her box. It does so, however, with 
a sense of peace, a love of life itself, and a great confidence in the 
final result. Unless we truly believe that the process of self-discovery 
is a joyous one we will never follow it through. 

The symbolism of the pictures and numbers reinforces the 
comparison of Strength and the Chariot. The Chariot shows a man 
and Strength shows a woman. Traditionally, of course, these 
represent rationality and emotion, aggression and surrender. Also 
traditionally, the Chariot’s number 7 belongs to ‘male’ magic, the 
number 8 to ‘female’. This symbolism arises from anatomy. The 
male body contains seven openings (counting the nose as one), the 
female eight. Also, the male body possesses seven points, the arms 
and legs, the head, the centre, and the penis. The female possesses 
eight, the breasts replacing the penis. 

What do we mean by male and female magic? Esoteric theory 
considers sexual energy as a manifestation of the energy principles 
underlying the entire universe; male and female being similar to the 
positive and negative poles of electro-magnetism. Through 
manipulation of this bipolar energy, ‘magic’ power results. The 
occultist considers these principles a science, no more, and no less, 
mysterious than the modern scientist’s manipulation of atomic 
energy. We can describe the Rider pack Lovers as a schematic 
energy diagram. Therefore, the Chariot and Strength belong 
together esoterically as the practical manifestation of the principles 
symbolized in the Magician and the High Priestess. 

Psychologically they also embody two kinds of power. Our society 
emphasizes the ‘masculine’ force of control; conquest, dominating 
the world through reason and will. But the ‘feminine’ qualities of 
intuition and spontaneous emotion are far from weakness. To 
release your deepest emotions with love and faith requires great 
courage as well as strength. 

The Fool comes in here. Only by a kind of psychic leap can we 


TURNING INWARDS 


69 


move from the conscious to the unconscious. And only a fool would 
make such a jump, for why give up success, control? The gods forced 
Oedipus; what inner needs will force the rest of us? 

Strength’s position, as first in the line, links the card to the 
Magician, as does the infinity sign, another reference to 8, above her 
head. The reversal of sex indicates a joining of aspects from both the 
male and female archetypes. The Magician’s active involvement 
with life has been modified by the inner peace implied in the High 
Priestess. 

The woman’s sensual figure, her blonde hair, and the flower belt 
linking her to the lion, connect the card to the Empress as well. The 
Empress represents natural instincts and passion; again we see the 
image of emotional energy, the ‘animal desires’ as some Tarot 
commentators call it, released and tamed. Waite describes the 
flower belt as a second infinity sign, with one loop around the 
woman’s waist, the other around the lion’s neck. We can describe 
Strength as the Magician united with the Empress; that is, the 
Magician’s power of consciousness and direction has mingled with 
the Empress’s sensuality, giving it a sense of purpose and leading to 
the Hermit. Notice that for the first line 1 plus 3 equals 4, the 
Emperor. For the second line 1 plus 3 becomes multiplied by 2; the 
inner truth of the High Priestess. 

Another aspect of the trump carries this unity of 1 and 3 still 
further. The Hebrew letter given by Case and others to Strength is 
Teth. Teth refers Qabalistically to ‘snake’; but the Hebrew for snake 
also means ‘magic’. All over the world people have made this 
connection; from the snakes on Hermes’s magic wand to the 
kundalini power of Tantric occultism in India and Tibet. And the 
snake, in kundalini and elsewhere, stands for sexuality. The Tarot, 
as we know from the serpent twined around the Tree of Life behind 
the woman on the Lovers, considers sexuality to be a force towards 
enlightenment. If, esoterically, Strength stands for the actual 
practice of sexual magic, psychologically it refers again to releasing 
that energy bound up in our strongest feelings. When we compare 
Strength with the Devil we will see that the release here is actually a 
partial one. The lion is controlled and directed rather than allowed 
to take the self wherever it wants to go. 

In alchemy the lion stands for gold, the sun, and sulphur. Sulphur 
is a lower element and gold (in alchemy) the highest. The process by 
which sulphur becomes gold is precisely the process of transforming 
the lower self. And the design of Temperance, the last card of the 
line, with its liquid poured from one cup to another, depicts the 
alchemical goal of blending the opposites into a new and more 
meaningful existence. 




70 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Those who find life a matter of strict control, who see the 
unconscious as a ‘moral sewer’ of repressions (as Jung characterized 
the narrow Freudian view), and find the passions a torment, will see 
the lion as natural forces which the rational mind must overcome. 
Some older Tarot decks, including the Visconti, showed Heracles 
killing the Nemean lion. The passions conquered by reason. But the 
lion also stood for Christ, the radiant power of God. Those who 
allow the unconscious energy within themselves to emerge, guiding 
it with love and a faith in life, will discover that the energy is not a 
destructive beast but the same spirit force drawn down through the 
lightning rod of the Magician. 

In readings the card of Strength indicates the ability to face life, 
and particularly some difficult problem or time of change, with hope 
and eagerness. It shows a person strong from within, experiencing 
life passionately yet peacefully, without being controlled or carried 
away by those passions. The card represents the finding of the 
strength to begin or continue some difficult project, despite fear and 
emotional strain. 

If Strength appears in connection with the Chariot it can signify 
an alternative to force and will-power, especially, of course, if the 
Chariot is reversed. The two cards can also symbolize 
complementary sides, the best configuration being Strength in the 
position of the inner self, and the Chariot in the position of the outer 
(the vertical and horizontal lines of a cross). Then we see a person 
who acts powerfully but with a sense of calm. 

Strength reversed indicates first of all weakness. The courage to 
face life fails and the person feels overwhelmed and pessimistic. It 
signifies also a torment from within. The bestial side of the lion 
breaks away from the unity of spirit and sensuality. The passions 
become the enemy, threatening to destroy the conscious personality 
and the life it has built up for itself. 


TURNING INWARDS 


71 



THE HERMIT. 

i- 


Figure 10 

The Hermit 

Like the six-pointed star within the Hermit’s lantern, the idea of the 
Hermit goes in two directions; one inner, one outer. Primarily the 
card means a withdrawal from the outer world for the purpose of 
activating the unconscious mind. We see this process symbolized in 
the downward pointing ‘water’ triangle, as the alchemists called it. 
But the Hermit also signifies a teacher who will show us how to 
begin this process, and will help us find our way. The upward 
pointing ‘fire’ triangle symbolizes this special guide, who might be 
an occult teacher, a therapist, our own dreams, or even a spirit guide 
evoked from within the self. 

The image of the Hermit occupied a special place in the medieval 
imagination. Living in the woods or the desert, totally withdrawn 
from all the normal concerns of humanity, the hermit presented an 
alternative to the Church. The European version of a yogi ascetic, he 
demonstrated the possibility of approaching God through personal 
experience. People often looked upon the hermits as living saints, 
and attributed magic powers to them, in the way that yoga disciples 
will tell wonderful stories about their masters. 

Though the hermit withdrew from society he or she 1 did not 

1 Women often became hermits and the medieval hatred of women sometimes became 
a veneration of a particular woman who had supposedly conquered the evil of her sex. 




















72 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


withdraw from humanity. Among other functions, they gave shelter 
and sometimes blessings to travellers. Countless stories, especially 
the Grail legends, depict the hermit who acts as a giver of wisdom to 
the knight on a spiritual quest. Again, we see the Hermit’s double 
image: example and guide. 

The Hermit image has persisted long after the special practice has 
died away. The transcendental philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson 
travelled days through remote Scotland to find the cabin of Thomas 
Carlyle. Emerson’s friend, Henry David Thoreau, himself lived in a 
cabin at Walden Pond to find a sense of himself and of nature. He 
then wrote about it as an example to others. Nietzsche’s Dus Sprach 
^arathustra enshrined the Hermit’s image; the book begins with 
Zarathustra’s return after achieving personal transformation. And 
today, countless people have given themselves to Eastern gurus in 
the hope that these hermit-like teachers can transform their lives. 

For those who cannot find an actual guide the psyche will often 
provide one. Jung and his followers have described their patients’ 
many dreams of wise old men guiding them on mysterious journeys 
into the psyche. In many cases dream analysis discovered that the 
dream guide actually stood for the therapist. The unconscious can 
recognize a Hermit teacher before the conscious mind can. 

The great thirteenth century Qabalist, Abraham Abulafia, 
described three levels of Qabalah. The first was doctrine; that which 
can be learned from texts. The second came from the direct 
guidance given by a personal teacher, while the third, the most 
developed, was the direct experience of ecstatic union with God. 
These three levels connect very directly to the Tarot, not only in the 
three lines, but in three specific trumps which together form an 
isosceles triangle. The first level we see in the Hierophant; the third, 
directly below the Hierophant, one level removed, appears in the 
joyous child of card 19, the Sun. The second level, however, comes 
not in the card between them, the Hanged Man, but on the other 
end of the pattern, as the second card in the second line, the Hermit. 

Doctrine and mystery both come as the end of a process; doctrine 
because you first must arrange your life before you can approach the 
study of a special way (Qabalists often restricted certain important 
texts to people over thirty-five), and ecstasy because you first must 
pass the archetypal confrontation with darkness and mystery. A 
guide, however, appears at the very start of the journey, after the 
traveller has found the Strength to begin. 

As an emblem of personal development, rather than a guide, the 
Hermit signifies the idea that only by withdrawing from the outer 
world can we awaken the inner self. Those who see the Tarot in two 
halves, with the Wheel of Fortune as the mid-point, view the Hermit 



TURNING INWARDS 


73 


as the period of contemplation before the Wheel of Life turns 
towards its second half. When we view the Tarot in lines of seven we 
see that this withdrawal, and the vision of the Wheel itself, are steps 
towards a greater goal. 

We see the Hermit on a cold lonely peak. He has left the world of 
the senses to enter the mind. This image of the mind as stark and 
chill conveys only a partial truth, or rather, an illusion. The mind is 
rich with symbols, with joy, with the light and love of the spirit. But 
before we can apprehend these things we must first experience the 
mind as a silent alternative to the noisy world of the senses. For 
shamans the barren peak is often a direct reality. In places as far 
apart as Siberia and the American South-West shaman candidates 
go alone into the wilderness to seek the spirit guides who will teach 
them how to heal. 

The Hermit signifies a transition. Through the techniques of 
meditation, or psychic discipline, or analysis, we allow the hidden 
parts of the psyche to begin to speak to us. Later we will experience 
a sense of rebirth, first as an angel (the eternal part of the self, 
beyond the ego), then later, more deeply felt, as a free child riding 
forth from the garden of past experience. For now, the path belongs 
to the image of the wise old man, alone, supported and warmed by 
his stiff grey cloak of contemplation. 

The symbol of the lantern returns us to the Hermit as guide and 
teacher. He tolds the light out to us, indicating his willingness to 
lead us and our ability to find the way if we will only use the 
Strength we have to follow. In some decks the Hermit conceals his 
lantern under his cloak, and then it symbolizes the light of the 
unconscious hidden under the cloak of the conscious mind. By 
making it visible, yet within a lantern, the Rider pack indicates that 
we release the light through a definite process of self-awareness, and 
that this process is available to anyone. 

We have seen the star both as a symbol of the Hermit as teacher, 
and also as a light of the unconscious, beckoning us to discover its 
secrets. It further signifies the goal of resolving the opposites of life. 
The water and fire triangles traditionally represent not only two 
elements usually opposed, but also male and female united in a 
single form. 

The Hermit’s staff suggests a wizard’s staff, and therefore the 
magic wand of the Magician. Whereas the Fool used the wand 
instinctively, the Hermit leans on it as a conscious support. It 
therefore symbolizes the teaching which helps open the inner 
awareness. 

Directly below the High Priestess the Hermit relates to her 
principle of withdrawal, indicating again that we must in some sense 





74 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

leave the outer world if we wish to work on ourselves. As with 
Strength the second line reverses the sexual archetype. The role 
symbolism here teaches us that a deliberate mental effort, based on 
specific techniques and teachings, takes us beyond the locked up 
intuition of the High Priestess’s closed temple. The waters of that 
temple are not fully released; the veii remains in place until the 
lightning of the Tower, below the Hermit, tears it open. Under the 
influence of trump 9, however, the unconscious speaks to us from 
behind the veil, through symbols, dreams, and visions. 

The distinction between male-female symbolism and the reality of 
individual people leads us to some important realizations about 
archetypes. We tend to see hermits and teachers as wise old men, 
even in our dreams, because our two thousand year old patriarchy 
has so impressed this image on our minds. In earlier times, the 
guides were most often women, as representatives of the Great 
Goddess, and even in our age such women as Madame Blavatsky 
have served this ancient function. The fact that our dreams often 
choose wise old men demonstrates the very important fact that the 
unconscious too draws its material from the cultural background of 
the individual dreamer. Many people view archetypes as rigid fixed 
images shared by all people at all times. Rather, archetypes are 
tendencies for the mind to form certain kinds of images, such as that 
of a guide, and the specific form an image takes will depend very 
much on a person’s cultural background and experience. Medieval 
Grail initiations and Australian desert rites follow the same 
archetypal pattern; it underlies them like a grid. Yet the outer form 
of that pattern varies immensely. 

The divinatory meanings for the Hermit derive from both its 
aspects. On the one hand it symbolizes a withdrawal from outer 
concerns. The person may physically remove himself, but this is not 
really necessary. What matters is the inner transfer of attention from 
‘getting and spending’ as Wordsworth called our worldly activities, 
to a person’s inner needs. It therefore requires an emotional 
withdrawal from other people and from activities once thought to be 
all-important. The card carries within it a sense of deliberate 
purpose, of withdrawing to work on self-development. In connection 
with this sense of purpose and with the picture of an old man the 
card symbolizes maturity, and a knowledge of what really matters in 
a person’s life. 

The card can also signify assistance from a definite guide, 
sometimes, as indicated above, a psychic guide from within, but 
more often a real person who will help you in your self-discoveries. 
Sometimes we do not ourselves recognize that such a guide exists for 
us. If the Hermit appears in a Tarot reading it may be wise to look 



TURNING INWARDS 


75 


carefully at the people around you. If you are involved in helping 
others find understanding then the Hermit can symbolize you in 
your role as guide and teacher. 

When we reverse the card we corrupt the idea of withdrawal. In 
the same way that the High Priestess reversed can mean a fear of 
life, the Hermit reversed can indicate a fear of other people. If we 
withdraw from society as a retreat then the fact of withdrawal 
becomes more and more dominant, leading to phobias and 
paranoia. As with other trumps thfc negative and positive aspects of 
the Hermit depend on the context. The Hermit reversed can 
sometimes simply mean that at this moment the person needs to 
become involved with other people. 

Because the card, when the right way up, suggests maturity the 
Hermit reversed can sometimes indicate a Peter Pan attitude to life. 
The person hangs on to basically meaningless activities, or else 
imitates childlike enthusiasm (like the imitation of spontaneity) as a 
way of avoiding the responsibilities of doing something with his or 
her life. I first encountered this interpretation for the Hermit 
reversed in a reading given by a man in New York to a friend of 
mine; I have since found it useful in many situations. Interestingly, I 
met the man through another friend who looked on the reader as a 
personal guide in her spiritual development. 








76 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



(a) (b) Figure 11 (c) 

The Wheel of Fortune 

Like certain other trump cards (most notably Death) the Wheel of 
Fortune derives from a medieval homily. The Church considered 
pride the greatest of sins, for in pride you set yourself before Christ. 










TURNING INWARDS 


77 


One lesson against pride was the idea of a great king falling from 
power. In many versions of the King Arthur legend, the king dreams 
or sees before him on the eve of his final battle, a vision of a rich and 
powerful king seated on top of a wheel. All of a sudden the goddess 
Fortuna turns the wheel and the king gets crushed at the bottom. 
Sobered, Arthur realises that no matter how much secular power we 
accrue, our fate rests always in God’s hands. The Visconti cards, on 
the right, above, enshrines this practical sermon. 

Now, we might consider this neat moral fable to be far removed 
from the powerful and mysterious symbols staring at us from the 
Waite-Smith card, on the top left, and the Oswald Wirth version on 
the bottom left. But Fortuna and her shining hoop have a curious 
history. First of all, the medieval image derives from a much earlier 
time, when Fortuna represented the Great Goddess, and the crushed 
king was a real event. Every year, at mid-winter, the priestesses 
sacrificed the king; by imitating the death of the year they humbled 
themselves to the Goddess’s power, and by choosing a new king they 
subtly suggested to her that she might once more create spring out of 
winter - an event by no means automatic to people who did not 
believe in ‘natural laws’ such as gravity. Thus, the Wheel originally 
symbolized both the mystery of nature and the human ability to take 
part in that mystery through a ritual sacrifice. Notice that the card 
comes directly below the Empress, the emblem of the Great Mother 
herself. 

By the Middle Ages the Wheel had lost its original meaning; this 
did not mean that it had lost its power to suggest the mystery of life. 
In Thomas Malory’s version of the King Arthur story we find the 
suggestion that the Wheel symbolizes the random turnings of‘luck’. 
Why do some people get rich and others poor? Why should a 
powerful king fall, and a formerly weak one rise to power? Who, or 
what, controls the turning wheel of life? Malory suggests that luck, 
seemingly meaningless ups and downs, is in reality fate; that is, the 
destiny God has chosen for each individual, based on reasons only 
God can understand. Because we cannot understand those reasons 
we say that the events of people’s lives arise out of luck, but it all 
belongs to God’s plan. 

With the Wheel, therefore, we come to the great question of how 
and why anything happens at all in the universe. What makes the 
sun shine? Burning elements, yes, but what makes them burn? How 
did atomatic energy come into existence? Why should spring follow 
winter, after all? Why, and how, does gravity work? Going further, 
we find that fate is also an illusion, a dodge to cover up the fact that 
we, with our limited vision, cannot see the inner connection between 
all things. ‘Oh well,’ we say, ‘it’s fate’, a meaningless statement 



78 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


because we cannot understand the meaning. Things do not just 
happen, they are made to happen. The power to shape events, to 
give life and form and purpose to the universe, belongs, Malory tells 
us, to the Holy Ghost, dwelling in the physical world as a presence 
within the Holy Grail (the Ace of Cups) in the same way that the 
Shekinah physically dwelt within the veiled sanctuary of the temple 
at Jerusalem. 

We come then to the truth that both the random events of life and 
the so-called ‘laws’ of the physical universe are mysteries leading us 
to an awareness of the spirit force drawn down by the upraised arm 
of the Magician and manifested in the natural world of the Empress. 
A great many mystics and shamans have said that their visions 
showed them how all things connect, how everything fits together, 
because the spirit unites the entire universe. Possibly we would all 
see and understand this grand scheme of life, if it were not for the 
fact that we do not live long enough. Our short lives narrow our 
vision to such a miniscule portion of the world that life appears 
meaningless. 

Now, this idea of the Wheel as the mystery of fate, with its hidden 
meaning, fits very well the modern Waite-Smith version of the card, 
especially when we consider it as halfway to the final trump. If we 
place the Rider pack Wheel beside the World we see immediately 
the link between them. In one we have a wheel filled with symbols; 
in the other we find a wreath of victory, and inside it a dancer who 
embodies the truth behind the symbols. Even more striking, we find 
the same four animals on each card in the corners, except that the 
mythological beings of card 10 have been transformed into 
something real and alive in the World. Thus, at the halfway point, 
we receive a vision of the inner meaning of life; at the end that vision 
has become real, embodied in our own being. 

In India, the king also lost his life each year to the Goddess. When 
the patriarchal Aryans ended this practice the image of the turning 
wheel of the year became an even more powerful symbol of the new 
religion. The ever-turning Wheel of Life came to signify the laws of 
karma, leading you to reincarnate in one body after another. Now, 
karma is in a way simply another explanation for the mystery of fate. 
By the actions you take in one life, you build up a certain destiny for 
yourself in the next, so that if you commit a great many evil deeds 
you create in your immortal self a kind of psychic need for 
punishment. When the time comes for your next incarnation you 
inevitably choose a low caste or diseased body. (This simple 
psychological explanation of karma is perhaps based more on 
Buddhism than Hinduism.) 

Again, our limited understanding prevents us from directly 



TURNING INWARDS 


79 


experiencing the truth behind the Wheel of Fate, or karma. When 
Buddha attained enlightenment he remembered every moment of 
every one of his past lives. Indeed, the memory was the 
enlightenment. By gaining full knowledge he was able to perceive 
that all those lives were only forms created by his desires. When he 
ended his desires he ‘got off the Wheel*. We could say that 
enlightenment means (or includes, at any rate) piercing through the 
outer events to the spirit that dwells within them, that is, finding the 
Holy Ghost within the Wheel of Fortune. 

It is significant that King Arthur experiences the Wheel of 
Fortune as a vision in a dream. Because whether we see it as the 
halfway point of the Major Arcana, or simply one of the steps to 
completing the second line, the Wheel is indeed a vision given to us 
by the unconscious. The Hermit has turned away from the outer 
world. As a result the unconscious shows him a vision of life as a 
turning wheel filled with symbols. 

The Wheel of Life does not become visible until we step away 
from it. When we are involved in it we see only the events 
immediately before and behind us; the daily concerns our egos find 
so important. When we withdraw wx can see the whole pattern. 
Psychologically we can view this vision as an assessment a person 
makes of where his or her life has gone and where it is going. On a 
deeper level, the vision remains mysterious and symbolic. We can 
see what we have made of our particular lives, but fate remains a 
mystery. 

The symbols on the Wheel all possess meaning; they help us to 
understand the truth within the visions. Nevertheless, we do not 
experience the full living force. The light of the unconscious remains 
veiled. 

It is significant also that Malory connects the Wheel of Fortune to 
the Holy Grail. For the Grail symbols, which are also the symbols of 
the Minor Arcana, go back probably almost as far as the yearly 
regal sacrifice. When the candidate for initiation into the ancient 
European mysteries was given his ‘vision’ of the inner secrets of the 
cult it was most likely the four symbols of the cup, the sword, the 
lance, and the pentacle, that were shown to him with great mystic 
ceremony. And the basic tools of the ritual magic, laid on the 
Magician’s table, are the same four symbols and also the suits of the 
Minor Arcana. 

Though we do not see the four symbols directly on trump 10 we 
do see two of their many analogues. The four creatures on the 
corners of the card derive from the vision of Ezekiel 1:10. They 
appear also in Revelations 4:7. Now, over the centuries these four 
figures, sometimes called the ‘guardians of heaven’ came to 










80 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


symbolize the four basic elements of ancient and medieval science. 
From the right-hand corner anti-clockwise they are fire, water, air, 
and earth, and these elements belong as well to Wands, Cups, 
Swords, and Pentacles. Besides representing the elements the four 
beasts also stand for the four fixed signs of the zodiac - Leo, Scorpio, 
Aquarius, and Taurus. The zodiac, of course, is the Great Wheel of 
the visible universe. Thus both the elements and the signs signify the 
physical world, again seen as a mystery, and which can only be truly 
understood by learning the secret truths. 

The other connection with the four elements comes in the four 
letter name of God on the Wheel’s rim. Beginning at the upper 
right-hand corner, and again reading anti-clockwise, the letters are, 
Yod, Heh, Vav, Heh. Because this name appears in the Torah 
without vowels (the four letters are all consonants) it is 
unpronounceable; therefore God’s ‘true’ name remains a secret. For 
at least two thousand years Jews and Christians have seen this name 
as magical. Mystics meditate on it (Abulafia’s ecstatic third level of 
Qabalah was reached through working with God’s name) and 
magicians manipulate it. For Qabalists the four letters are the very 
symbol of the world’s mysteries. The process of the universe's 
creation was held to have occurred in four stages, corresponding to 
the four letters. And of course, the letters also connect with the four 
elements, the Grail symbols, and the Minor Arcana. 

The Roman letters interspersed between the Hebrew are an 
anagram. Read clockwise from the-top, they spell ‘TARO’; read 
anti-clockwise they form ‘TORA’ (remember the High Priestess's 
scroll). We can also find the words ‘ROTA’, Latin for ‘wheel’, 
‘ORAT’, Latin for ‘speaks’ and ‘ATOR\ an Egyptian goddess (also 
spelled ‘Hathor’). Paul Foster Case, following MacGregor Mathers, 
founder of the Golden Dawn, has formed the sentence ‘ROTA 
TARO ORAT TORA ATOR\ This translates as, ‘The Wheel of 
Taro speaks the Law of Ator’. Case calls this the ‘law of letters’; 
since Ator became best known in Egypt as a goddess of the dead, it 
is actually the ‘law’ of eternal life, concealed in the natural world. 
Though the body dies, the soul continues. Case also points out that 
the Hebrew number values of the letters of‘TARO’ add up to 691, 
and that this, added to 26, the number value for the four letter name 
of God (called ‘Tetragrammaton’) makes 697. Those digits add up 
to 22, the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet and of the 
trumps in the Major Arcana. And of course 22 returns us to 4. 

The four symbols on the spokes are alchemical. From the top, 
read in a clockwise direction, they are Mercury, sulphur, water, and 
salt, and refer to the alchemical goal of line two, that is, 
transformation. Water is the symbol for dissolution, that is, 




TURNING INWARDS 


81 


dissolving the ego to release the true self that has become immersed 
in habits, fears, and defences. We will see just what this means when 
we consider Death and Temperance. 

The idea of death and rebirth is also symbolized in the creatures 
adorning the Wheel. The snake represents Set, the Egyptian god of 
evil, and legendary bringer of death into the universe. It is he who 
kills Osiris, god of life. It is very likely that this legend, like the 
W r heel itself, originated in the practice in pre-history of killing the 
god-king, especially when we consider that Set was once a hero god, 
and that the snake was sacred to the Goddess who would have 
received the sacrifice. The snake follows the Wheel down; the jackal¬ 
headed man going up is Anubis, guide to the dead souls s and 
therefore giver of new life. Now, according to some legends Anubis is 
Set’s son, and so we see that only death can bring new lifo, and when 
we fear death we are seeing only a partial truth. Psychologically, 
only the death of the outer self can release the life energy within. 

The sphinx on top of the Wheel represents Horus, Osiris’s son, 
and god of resurrection (in later centuries often replaced by Ator). 
Life has triumphed over death. But the sphinx, as we saw in the 
Chariot, also signifies the mystery of life. The Chariot controlled life 
with a strong ego. Now the sphinx has risen above the Wheel. If we 
allow the unconscious to speak we will sense some great secret to 
life, more important than the endless round of apparently 
meaningless events. 

Set, the snake, was also called god of darkness. Again, to see 
darkness as ‘evil’ is an illusion, and indeed, the fear of darkness, like 
the fear of death, belongs to the ego. The ego loves the light just as 
the unconscious loves the dark. In light everything is simple and 
straightforward; the ego can occupy itself with the sense impressions 
from the outer world. When darkness comes the unconscious begins 
to stir. That is why children see monsters at night. One reason we 
make the outer self so strong is so we will not face demons every time 
the lights go out. 

Those, however, who wish to go beyond the Chariot must face 
those terrors. Snakes and water, darkness and dissolution are all 
symbols of death, that is, death of the body and death of the ego. But 
life exists before and after the individual personality, which, of 
course, is only a bubble on the surface of our selves. Life is powerful, 
chaotic, surging with energy. Give way to it and Horus, the god of 
resurrection, will bring new life out of the chaos. The Wheel turns 
up as well as down. 

The W'irth version of the Wheel of Fortune proclaims this idea 
even more strongly. The Wheel rests on a boat in water. Dissolution, 
chaos, emerge as the essential reality underlying the physical 








82 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


universe. All the forms of existence, the great variety of things and 
events, are simply momentary creations out of that powerful energy 
that fills the cosmos. In Hindu myth Shiva periodically destroys the 
entire universe, when the outer forms, like the ego, have grown 
weary and dull, by releasing the basic energy from which the 
universe originally emerged. 

The number 10 suggests 0. The Fool is nothing and has no 
personality. But the Fool, like the number 0, is also everything, 
because he feels directly that energy of life, that sea surging beneath 
the boat. On the Rider pack Wheel of Fortune the centre of the 
Wheel bears no symbol. When we come to the still centre of 
existence, without ego or fear, all the outer forms vanish. We can 
understand this intuitively, but to really experience it we must allow 
ourselves to descend into that dark sea, to let the personality die, 
dissolve, and give way to the new life emerging out of darkness. 

In divinatory readings the Wheel of Fortune signifies some change 
in the circumstances of a person’s life. The person would likely not 
understand what has caused this change; there might be no direct 
reason that anyone can see, and in fact the person is likely not to be 
responsible in any normal sense of the word. A large corporation 
buys the company a man works for, and he becomes redundant. A 
love affair ends, not because the people have made any ‘mistakes’ in 
their treatment of each other, but simply because life continues. The 
Wheel turns. 

The important thing about change is the reaction. Do we accept 
the new situation and adapt to it? Do we use it as an opportunity 
and find some meaning and value in it? If the Wheel appears the 
right way up it signifies adaptation. In its strongest sense it can 
indicate the ability to pierce through the mystery of events to find a 
greater understanding of life. The end of a love affair, despite its 
pain, can give greater self-knowledge. 

Reversed, the card signifies a struggle against events, usually 
doomed because the change has happened and life will always win 
against the personality that tries to oppose it. If the person 
concerned, however, has always reacted passively to whatever life 
has done to him or her, then the W'heel reversed can signify a more 
important change than simply a new set of circumstances. It can 
open the way to a new awareness of responsibility for your own life. 




TURNING INWARDS 


83 



JUSTICE . 


Figure 12 

Justice 

The image of this trump derives from the Greek Titaness Themis, 
who appears, with her blindfold and scales, on court house frescoes 
throughout the Western world. The legal Justitia, to give her her 
Latin name, was blindfolded to demonstrate that the law does not 
discriminate and applies to weak and powerful alike. The principle 
of social justice, however, properly belongs to the Emperor, directly 
above Justice. Card 11 indicates that the psychic laws of Justice, by 
which we advance according to our ability to understand the past, 
depends on seeing the truth about ourselves and about life. The 
Tarot Justitia, therefore, wears no blindfold. 

So far, we have spoken of the second line as a process of 
withdrawal from outer concerns to awaken the inner vision of 
ourselves and of life. But a vision of the underlying nature of things is 
meaningless if it does not produce an active response. We must 
always act (the Magician principle) on the wisdom received from 
the inner self (the High Priestess principle). Not just the perfectly 
balanced scales but all the images on the card point to an 
equilibrium between understanding and action. The figure, a 
woman, appears androgynous; though she sits firmly on her stone 
bench she looks poised to stand; one foot points outward from her 
robe, the other remains hidden. The sword, an emblem of action, 























84 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


points straight upward, indicating both resolve and the idea that 
wisdom is like a sword piercing through the illusion of events to find 
the inner meaning. Two-edged, the sword signifies choice. Life 
requires us to make decisions; at the same time each decision, once 
made, cannot be revoked. It becomes part of us. We are formed by 
the actions we have taken in the past; we form our future selves by 
the actions we take now. 

The scales also represent the perfect balance of past and future. 
Past and future balanced, not in time, but in the clear sight of 
Justice staring out at you from the exact centre of the Major Arcana. 

Throughout the first half of the Major Arcana, when a person 
involves himself in the outer world, he suffers from the illusion that 
he is living life on the active principle. This is because we confuse 
doing things with action. As we turn inwards we assume we turn 
away from action; and indeed the process of line two cannot be 
accomplished without a pause in our outer lives, or at least a shift in 
attention. But real action, as opposed to pointless movement, always 
brings meaning and value to our lives; such action comes out of 
understanding. Otherwise, we remain ruly passive, machines being 
pushed from one event to the next with no understanding of what 
causes us to do the things we do. The true purpose of line two is not 
to abandon thp active principle but to awaken it. 

The imagery of trump 11 combines the Magician and the High 
Priestess more completely than ever before. First of all, the digits of 
number 11 add up to 2, but the number also signifies a higher 
version of 1 (as well as a lesser version of 21). The woman seated 
before two pillars with a veil between them suggests the High 
Priestess, but her red robe, and her posture, one arm up, one arm 
down, implies the Magician. True action arises from self- 
knowledge; wisdom arises out of action. In life, as in the picture, the 
Magician and the High Priestess are inextricably combined, like a 
male and female snake twined around each other (symbol of the 
kundalini as well as the caduceus of Hermes), or the double helix of 
DNA. Hie colour of the veil is purple, emblem of inner wisdom; 
background, crown, hair, and scales are all yellow, signifying mental 
force. Wisdom does not arise spontaneously. We must think about 
our lives if we wish to understand them. But all our thinking goes 
nowhere unless it develops out of a clear vision of the truth. 

On the microcosmic level of personal psychology the Wheel of 
Fortune represented a vision of a person’s life; the events, who you 
are, what you’ve made of yourself. Justice indicates an 
understanding of that vision. The way to understanding lies in 
responsibility. As long as we believe that our past lives just happen, 
that we do not bring our own selves into existence through every 




TURNING INWARDS 


85 


thing we do, then the past remains a mystery, and the future an 
endlessly turning wheel, empty of meaning. But when we accept 
that every- event in our lives has helped to form our characters, and 
that in the future we will continue to create ourselves through our 
actions, then the sword of wisdom cuts through the mystery. 

Further, by accepting responsibility for ourselves we 
paradoxically free ourselves from the past. Like Buddha 
remembering all his lives, we can only get loose from the past by 
becoming conscious of it. Otherwise we constantly repeat past 
behaviour. This is why Justice belongs in the centre of our lives. The 
ego may be only a persona, a kind of mask, but that mask can 
control us as long as we will not admit having forged it ourselves. 

The idea of responsibility for your own life does not imply any sort 
of invisible control over the outer world. It does not mean, for 
instance, that if an earthquake destroys your house you have 
somehow willed this to happen, for whatever hidden reasons of your 
own. Understanding includes accepting the limitations of your 
physical existence. The universe is vast and strange, and no 
individual can control what happens in it. 

Nor does responsibility imply anything moral. It simply means 
that, like it or not, whatever you do, whatever you experience, 
contributes to the development of your personality. Life demands 
that you respond to every event. Not a moral requirement, just a fact 
of existence. 

And yet all our instincts, psychology, and religion, as well as the 
testimony of mystics, tells us that life contains something more, an 
inner core independent of that outer self thrown from one experience 
to another. The second line shows the outer personality dying and 
the inner core, the angel of Temperance, being allowed to emerge. 
Before such a release can happen we must accept the ‘justice’ of our 
lives; what we are we have made ourselves. 

Our age sees this process of awareness as primarily psychological, 
best exemplified in the difficult process of psychoanalysis. Other 
ages have externalized the process of transformation in the dramatic 
rituals of initiation. All initiations follow the same pattern. Having 
gathered his or her courage to become a neophyte the candidate first 
receives instruction in the teaching of the cult or mystery; during 
this time steps are taken, through meditation, ritual and drugs, to 
open the channels to the unconscious and make the person 
receptive. These first stages are symbolized in Strength and the 
Hermit. Then, in a great atmosphere of mystery and drama, the 
candidate is shown a vision of the cult’s secret mysteries. (They are 
kept secret partly to protect them from unbelievers, but even more to 
make them effective when revealed.) In the Grail cults this vision 





86 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


was a dramatic procession of the Grail and its attendant symbols, 
carried by women weeping for a wounded king. We see an analogue 
of this vision in the Wheel of Fortune. 

And now comes the crucial moment. The candidate must make a 
response. If he or she simply stands there passively waiting for the 
next events, then the initiation cannot continue. In the Grail cults 
the necessary response was most likely a question, either ‘What is 
the meaning of these things?’ or more subtly, ‘Whom does the Grail 
serve?’ By asking this question the candidate gives the cult a chance 
to answer, that is, to continue the initiation through the ritual death 
and rebirth. More important, he or she shows a recognition of being 
part of the process, responsible for its proper outcome. This is more 
difficult than it sounds. The ritual symbolizes the life, death, and 
rebirth of nature, as well as the body dying to release the eternal 
soul. To speak at such an awesome event (and remember that the 
initiate believed in his or her gods and goddesses in a way impossible 
for most of us today) required a courage at least as great as that 
needed to accept the truths revealed through psychological analysis 
and awakening. 

In our time the emphasis on individualism leads us to think only 
of personal death and rebirth. The great iniations, on the other 
hand, served not only to transform the particular person, but also 
linked him or her to the wider mysteries of the universe. Following 
this lead we can see another reason why Justice belongs in the centre 
of the Major Arcana. We have spoken of the world as a great inter¬ 
play of opposites, a constantly turning wheel of light and dark, life 
and death. We have also said that at the centre of the wheel is the 
stationary point around which the opposites endlessly revolve. The 
balanced scales of Justice again suggest that stationary point. When 
we find the centre of our lives everything comes into balance. When 
all the opposites, including past and future, come into balance we 
are able to be free within ourselves. 

Many people wonder what the Tarot, or the I Ching, or astrology 
tell us about free will. If the cards can predict what we will do, does 
that mean free will does not really exist? The question arises from a 
misunderstanding of free will itself; we think of it as something 
simple and independent of the past. At any moment, we think, we 
are free to do whatever we want. But our supposedly free choices are 
governed by our past actions. If we do not understand ourselves, 
how can we expect to make a free choice? Only by seeing and 
accepting the past can we free ourselves from it. 

A person may ask the cards about some situation. The cards very 
directly outline the consequences of some decision, say, whether or 
not to go ahead with a love affair, or to start some new project. Let 



TURNING INWARDS 


87 


us say that the cards indicate disaster, and that the person really can 
see the likelihood of what the cards predict. Now the person might 
say, ‘Well, this is likely, but my free will allows me to change the 
situation’. So he or she goes ahead and the situation turns out 
exactly as the cards predicted. The person has not really used free 
will at all; rather, the idea of free will has served as an excuse for 
ignoring what he or she recognized as a valid projection. This is not 
a hypothetical situation; it happens again and again with Tarot 
readings. It is not enough just to foresee a likely outcome for us to 
change or prevent that event. We must understand why it is coming, 
and we must work on the causes within ourselves for the things we 
do and the ways we react. Free will certainly exists. We just do not 
know how to use it. The most important thing we can learn from 
Tarot readings is just how little we exercise our freedom. 

In Tarot readings one should always pay very careful attention to 
the card of Justice. Its appearance indicates first of all that events 
have worked out in the way they were ‘meant’ to work out; that is, 
what is happening to you comes from situations and decisions in the 
past. You have what you deserve. Secondly it indicates a need and a 
possibility for seeing the truth of this outcome. The card signifies 
absolute honesty. At the same time it shows the possibility that your 
actions in the future can be changed by a lesson learned in the 
present situation. 

We cannot become honest with ourselves without extending that 
honesty to our dealings with other people. In this sense the card 
carries the obvious meanings of Justice; honesty, fairness, correct 
actions, and of course, in legal and other matters, a just decision - 
though not necessarily the decision a person might prefer. 

Reversed, the card indicates dishonesty with yourself and others. 
It shows an unwillingness to see the meaning of events and shows 
especially that you are missing some opportunity for a greater 
understanding of yourself and your life. On the outer level it 
indicates dishonesty and unfair actions or decisions. Sometimes it is 
others who are unfair to us. The reversed meaning can refer also to 
unjust legal decisions or to bad treatment from someone. 

On the other hand we must not allow the suggestion of unfairness 
to act as an excuse for denying our own responsibility for what 
happens to us. Justice reversed sometimes reflects the attitude, ‘It is 
unfair. Look how everybody treats me’. And on and on. Whether the 
right way up or reversed the clear eyes of Justice send us an 
overwhelming message. In the words of Emerson, ‘Nothing can save 
you but yourself’. 




88 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 




(a) Figure 13 (b) 

The Hanged Man 

After the crisis of seeing what you have made of your life comes the 
peace of acceptance; after Justice, the Hanged Man. Artists, writers, 
and psychologists have all felt drawn to this card, with its hints of 
great truths in a simple design. We have already referred to the 
occult tradition behind the upside down posture and crossed legs. In 
discussing Strength we said that occultists seek to release the energy 
of the desires and transform it into spiritual energy. Many occultists 
particularly the alchemists, have believed that one very direct way to 
do this is literally to stand on your head, so that gravity will pull 
down the energy from the genitals to the brain. Of course, only the 
most naive and optimistic alchemist would have expected such a 
thing to literally happen. They may have believed that trace 
elements found in genital fluid will seep down and affect the brain; 
more to the point, the reversal of physical posture serves as a very 
direct symbol of the reversal of attitude and experience that comes 
through spiritual awakening. Where everyone else is frenzied, you 
will know peace. Where other people believe themselves to be free, 
but are actually pushed from one thing to another by forces they do 
not understand, you will achieve true freedom by understanding and 
embracing those forces. 

The Hanged Man hangs on a tree shaped like the letter T. Now, 




TURNING INWARDS 


89 


this is the bottom half of an ankh, Egyptian symbol of life and is 
sometimes called a Tau cross. According to Case the ankh in Egypt 
stood for the Hebrew letter Tau, which is the letter belonging to the 
World. Thus, the Hanged Man lies halfway to the World. We see 
this as well in the fact that 12 is 21 backwards, and if you turn the 
Hanged Man upside down (making the man himself right side up) 
you will have almost the same figure as the World Dancer. When we 
ask. therefore, what card serves as the halfway point for the Major 
Arcana, the answer is not one but three - the Wheel, Justice, and the 
Hanged Man, symbolizing a process rather than a moment. 

Notice that while the Dancer extends her arms with their magic 
wands the Hanged Man keeps his arms crossed behind his back. 
Remember also that he is upside down. At this stage a deep spiritual 
awareness can only be maintained by withdrawing from society. In 
the World we see that same awareness maintained amidst all the 
outer activities of life. 

He hangs on an ankh, which makes his tree the Tree of Life. 
Recalling Odin sacrificing himself on Yggdrasil we can also call the 
gallows the World Tree. This tree begins in the underworld (the 
unconscious), and reaches up through the physical world (the 
conscious) to heaven (the super-conscious). The ideas first 
represented by the diagram of the Lovers have begun to actually 
happen. What we saw previously as concepts now becomes, after 
Justice, a genuine experience. The Hanged Man’s number, 12, is 2 
times 6, that is, the High Priestess raising the Lovers to a higher 
level. 

Beyond all its symbolism the Hanged Man affects us because it 
shows a direct image of peace and understanding. The calm shows 
so strongly in the card because the Hanged Man has surrender 
involved joining the rituals instead of just watching them. For many 
modern people it involves releasing the emotions they have locked 
up for years. Notice that both these things are acts; surrender to the 
World Tree is an actual step we take, not a passive waiting. 

T.S. Eliot’s poem The Wasteland links the idea of an individual 
surrender to emotions with both the barrenness of European life 
after World War I and the ancient Grail mysteries. The wounded 
Fisher King can be healed by a ‘moment’s surrender which an age of 
prudence can never retract’. Earlier in the poem the hero is told 
‘Fear death by drowning’. The ego sees surrender as death - 
dissolution in the sea of life. The person who gives this warning is a 
Tarot reader. Eliot’s poem helped to popularize Tarot cards in the 
1920s. Specifically, it made famous the Hanged Man. Actually, the 
Hanged Man does not appear in the poem but is important because 
of his absence. 



90 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Eliot claimed to really know nothing of the Tarot, but only to use 
some images from it. Apparently, however, he knew at least one 
esoteric fact unknown to even many Tarot commentators - that, 
according to some esoteric writers the Hanged Man ‘originally’ bore 
the title, ‘The Drowned Phoenician Sailor’. Madame Sosostris 
applies this title to the hero. ‘This is your card.’ Surrender is his 
destiny, but he has denied it: ‘I do not find the Hanged Man.’ 

The crossed legs represent the number 4 upside down. 4 
symbolizes the earth with its four directions. By reversing his own 
sense of values the Hanged Man has turned the world on its head. 
The arms and head together form a downward pointing water 
triangle. The way to the super-conscious is through the unconscious. 
The Golden Dawn card on the right of the Rider version shows the 
Hanged Man suspended over water. Most Tarot Qabalists assign 
the letter ‘Mem’ to this card. Mem stands for ‘seas’ or the element of 
water. 

We therefore see 4, the world, consciousness, and 3, here 
representing water, or the unconscious, in the Hanged Man’s body. 
These numbers multiplied form 12. In multiplication the original 
numbers become dissolved and form something greater than their 
sum. 

The number 12, like 21, suggests both 1 and 2. The card reflects 
the Magician in the sense that the power drawn down by the wand 
has now entered the Hanged Man; we see it as the circle of light 
about his head. The experience of really feeling the spirit force 
within life is one of great power and excitement in the midst of 
complete calm. The number 2 suggests the High Priestess; so does 
the image of water. Both cards indicate a withdrawal, but where 
trump 2 indicated the archetype of receptivity, trump 12 shows an 
experience of it. 

1 plus 2 equals 3. The Empress directly felt life through emotional 
involvement, the Hanged Man feels it through inner awareness. 

In readings the Hanged Man bears the message of independence. 
Like the Fool, which signified doing what you sensed was best, even 
if other people thought it foolish, the Hanged Man indicates being 
who you are, even if others think you have everything backwards. It 
symbolizes the feeling of being deeply connected to life and can 
mean a peace that comes after some difficult trial. 

The trump reversed indicates an inability to get free of social 
pressure. Rather than listen to our inner selves we do what others 
expect or demand of us. Our awareness of life always remains 
second-hand, never a direct experience but only a series of 
stereotypes, like the person who models his or her behaviour on the 
orders of parents and the actions of movie stars. 




TURNING INWARDS 


91 


The card reversed also means fighting your inner self in some 
way. It can mean the person who tries to deny some basic part of 
himself or simply the person who cannot accept reality and who in 
some way or other is constantly battling life. By putting his or her 
ego against the world this person too never fully experiences life. 
None of us can know the full meaning of being alive until, like Odin, 
we hang ourselves on the World Tree, its roots deep beyond 
knowledge in the sea of experience, its branches lost among the 
endless stars. 



(a) • Figure 14 (b) 

Death 

As much as the Lovers (directly above Death) Arthur Waite’s design 
for trump 13 departs from standard Tarot imagery. The picture on 
the right, above, comes from the esoteric Golden Dawn Tarot, but, 
even so, illustrates the older, essentially social message of Death. 
Death strikes everyone, kings and commoners alike. This basic 
democracy of death was a favourite theme of medieval sermons. As 
an idea it goes back at least as far as the Jewish practice of burying 
everyone in the same style, a white shroud and a plain pine box, so 
that in death rich become level with the poor. 

As we might guess, the great power of death leads us beyond 
democracy to both philosophical and psychological meanings. 
Death, like life, is eternal and always present. Individual forms are 
















92 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


always dying while others come into existence. Without death to 
clear away the old, nothing new could find a place in the world. 
Many science fiction novels have shown the tyrannical society that 
would result if the world’s leaders did not die. The liberation of 
Spain after the death of Franco aptly demonstrated death’s 
importance. 

When we die our flesh decays, leaving only the skeleton. That too 
will eventually pass but it lasts long enough to at least hint at 
eternity. Therefore, the skeleton in the Golden Dawn card implies 
that eternity triumphs over the transitory. Now, the skeleton has an 
occult meaning as well. All over the world the training for shamans 
includes methods of seeing one’s own skeleton, using drugs, 
meditation, even scraping the skin off the face. By freeing the bone 
from the flesh shamans connect themselves to eternity. 

Because people fear death they seek reason and value in it. The 
Christian religion teaches us that death liberates our souls from the 
sinful flesh so that we may join God in a greater life to come. Carl 
Jung has written of the value of believing in an afterlife. Without it, 
death may seem too monstrous to accept. 

Other people have pointed out that death joins us to nature. The 
consciousness that isolates us from the world will be obliterated; 
though the body will decay, that only means that it is feeding other 
creatures. Each death brings new life. Many people find the notion 
of themselves being eaten horrible to contemplate. The modern 
practice of embalming and painting corpses so that they look alive, 
and then of burying them in sealed metal caskets derives from the 
desire to maintain the body’s separateness from nature even in 
death. 

The fact is, since we will not know what happens to our bodies 
once the spirit has left them, what we really fear is the destruction of 
the personality. It is the ego that sees itself as separate from life; 
because it is only a mask the ego does not wish to die. It wishes to 
make itself superior to the universe. 

If we can accept death we will be able to live more fully. The ego 
never wants to release energy; it tries to hoard it against the fear of 
death. As a result new energy cannot get in. We see this very 
graphically in peoples breathing when they panic. They try to gulp 
air in without letting any out and as a result become short of breath. 

In sex too the ego hoards energy. It fights climax and surrender 
because at that moment the ego partly dissolves. In Elizabethan 
England sexual intercourse was often called ‘dying’. And Death in 
the Tarot comes below the Lovers. 

Because the ego resists the very idea of death and therefore keeps 
us from enjoying life we must sometimes take extreme steps to get 



TURNING INWARDS 


93 


past it. The initiation rites always led up to a simulated death and 
rebirth. The initiate is led to believe that he or she is actually about 
to die. Everything is done to make this death as real as possible so 
that the ego will be tricked and in fact experience that dreaded 
dissolution. Then, when the initiate is ‘reborn’ he or she experiences 
a new maturity and a new freedom of energy. In recent years many 
people have experienced something very like these rites through 
using psychedelic drugs. They believe they are dying and they feel 
themselves reborn. However, without the preparation symbolized in 
the Hanged Man the experience can often be deeply disturbing. 

Contrary to what many people believe the card of Death does not 
actually refer to transformation. Rather, it shows us the precise 
moment at which we give up the old masks and allow the 
transformation to take place. Perhaps we can understand this better 
if we consider the Tarot’s parallel in psychotherapy. By force of will 
(Strength) the person, with the help of the therapist-guide (the 
Hermit), allows knowledge to emerge of who he or she really is, and 
what habits or fears he or she wishes to shed (Wheel and Justice). 
This knowledge brings calm and a desire to change (the Hanged 
Man). But then a fear sets in. ‘If I give up my behaviour’, the person 
thinks, ‘maybe there will be nothing left. I will die.’ We live under 
the ego’s control for so many years we come to believe that nothing 
else exists. The mask is all we know. Often people will stay stuck in 
therapy for years because they fear release. The nothingness of the 
Fool terrifies them. 

People who have been fat for years often experience a similar fear 
if they try to diet. ‘I have always been fat’, they think. ‘I am a fat 
person. If I get skinny I will not exist any more.’ The fact is, this is 
true. The ‘I* that was a fat person will no longer exist. But 
something else will emerge. 

The Waite image for trump 13 increases the psychological 
meaning of the card. The four people demonstrate different 
approaches to change. The king, struck down, shows the rigid ego. If 
life comes at us with enough power the ego may collapse; insanity 
can result from an inability to adjust to extreme change. The priest 
stands and faces Death directly; he can do so because his stiff robes 
and hat protect him and support him. We see here the value of a 
code of belief to help us past our fears of death. The Maiden 
symbolizes partial innocence. The ego is not rigid, yet still aware of 
itself, unwilling to surrender. Therefore she kneels but turns away. 
Only the child, representing complete innocence, faces Death with a 
simple offering of flowers. 

Death wears black armour. We have already seen how blackness 
and darkness symbolize the source of life as well as its end. Black 






94 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


absorbs all colour; death absorbs all individual lives. The skeleton 
rides a white horse. White repels all colours and therefore 
symbolizes purity, but also nothingness. The white rose stands for 
the desires purified, for when the ego dies selfish and repressive 
needs die with it. 

At the back of the card we see a sun rising between two pillars. 
The ego belongs to the outer world of duality, separating and 
categorizing experience. Through Death we feel the radiant power 
of Life, which knows only itself. The landscape before the pillars 
reminds us of the ‘land of the Dead’ described in all mythologies. 
We fear the death of our old selves because we do not know what to 
expect afterwards. One main function of those shamans who see 
their skeletons is to go ahead through the Land of the Dead and thus 
be able to guide the souls of others. 

A river flows through the middle of the card. Rivers, as we saw 
with the Empress, indicate the unity of change and eternity. The 
fact that they lead to the sea reminds us of the formlessness and 
oneness of the universe. The boat, reminiscent of the Pharaohs’ 
burial boats, symbolizes the true self carried through Death to a new 
life. 

No matter the picture, all Tarot cards bear the number 13. 
Though most people consider 13 unlucky they do not know why. In 
our culture 13 refers to Judas, since he was the thirteenth man at the 
Last Supper, and therefore the number indicates Christ’s (and all 
people’s) death. Friday the thirteenth is especially unlucky because 
Christ died on a Friday. But we can also describe Christ as the 
thirteenth man. Death leads to resurrection. 

In a more symbolic sense 13 is unlucky because it takes us beyond 
12. 12 is something of a‘perfect’number. It combines the archetypes 
of 1 and 2, it symbolizes the zodiac and therefore the universe, it can 
be divided by 1,2, 3, 4, and 6, more digits than any other number. 
13 destroys this elegance. It can be divided by nothing but 1 and 
itself. Again, we can go beyond the negative aspects of the 
symbolism. Precisely because it ruins the perfection of 12, 13 
signifies a new creation; death breaks up old forms and makes way 
for the new. 

The number 13 adds up to 4, the Emperor. Through Death we 
overcome our outer ‘social’ selves. Since 13 is a higher form of 3 the 
card also recalls the Empress, and reminds us again that in nature 
life and death are inseparable. 

In divinatory readings Death signifies a time of change. Often, it 
indicates a fear of change. In its most positive aspect it shows a 
clearing away of old habits and rigidness to allow a new life to 
emerge. In its most negative aspect it indicates a crippling fear of 




TURNING INWARDS 


95 


physical death. This fear goes deeper than many people realize, and 
often a reading with many positive indications will end badly 
because of Death in the position of fears. 

The trump reversed indicates being stuck in old habits. Waite 
talks of, ‘inertia, sleep, lethargy' in life. This sense of a sluggish, 
boring life masks the sometimes desperate battle of the ego to avoid 
change. The card always indicates that Death, with its subsequent 
rebirth, is not only a possibility but also, in a sense, a necessity. The 
moment has cpme to die. By drowning us in lethargy, the ego 
prevents awareness of this fact from coming to consciousness. 
Inertia, boredom and depression often conceal inner terrors. 

Temperance 

The Chariot symbolized the successful construction of an ego able to 
deal victoriously with life. As time goes by this ego becomes rigid; 
slowly behaviour becomes less a response to reality and more and 
more a string of habits. The purpose of the second line of the Major 
Arcana is to free us from this artificial personality, and at the same 
time give us a glimpse of the greater truths within the universe. 
Temperance, appearing below the Chariot, shows a person whose 
behaviour is once again connected to the real world but in a way 
more meaningful than ever before. For if the child relates directly to 
life it does so without consciousness, and as consciousness grows so 
does the ego. Temperance indicates the ability to combine 
spontaneity with knowledge. 

The term ‘temperance’ means moderation. For most people this 
means self control. The Tarot Temperance, however, does not go to 
extremes simply because extremes are not necessary. Not an 
artificial inhibition according to a moral code, but exactly the 
opposite; a true and proper response to all situations as they arise. 

The word ‘temperance’ derives from the Latin ‘temperare’ which 
means ‘to mix’ or ‘to combine properly’. The person who has 
released his or her inner self is characterized not only by moderation 
but by an ability to combine the different sides of life. Many people 
can only deal with life by parcelling it off into sections. They create 
one personality for business and another for their private lives; both 
are false. They consider certain moments and situations to be 
‘serious’ and others to be ‘fun’ and are careful never to smile at a 
serious subject. The people they love are often not the people whom 
they find sexually attractive. All these separations derive from the 
inability to take life as it comes, moment by moment. Temperance 
combines the elements of life. In reality it combines the elements of 
the personality, so that the person and the outer world will flow 
together naturally. 




96 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



The trump displays the signs of combination all through the 
picture. When we look at the Waite-Smith image on the left we see 
first of all the water being poured from one cup to another; the 
elements of life flowing together. Notice that the lower cup is not 
directly below the upper, so that the picture shows a physical 
impossibility. To other people the Temperate person’s ability to 
handle all life’s problems with joy appears magical. 

The Rider pact Temperance presents both cups as magical. In the 
Wirth picture on the right the upper one is silver, indicating a flow 
from the Moon, that is, the unconscious, to the Sun, consciousness. 
The second line began with a withdrawal from the world to find the 
inner self; the time has now come to return to the normal activities of 
life. 
















TURNING INWARDS 


97 


The road especially signifies return. We have gone down into the 
self and now we are making our way back to involvement with the 
outer world, enriched. Notice that the two pillars of the earlier cards 
have become two mountains. Abstract ideas are becoming reality; 
Temperance is a card of behaviour, not concepts. 

The angel stands with one foot on land, one foot in water. As the 
water represents the unconscious so the land symbolizes the ‘real 
world’ of events and the other people. The Temperate personality, 
acting frorrt an inner sense of life, links the two realms. The water 
also indicates potentiality, that is, the possibilities of life, while the 
land symbolizes manifestation or actuality. The Temperate person, 
through his or her actions, brings into reality the wonders sensed by 
the Hanged Man. 

The BOTA Temperance (see fig. 15b) shows water being poured 
on a lion, and a torch dripping flames on an eagle. Leo symbolizes 
fire (the Magician), while the eagle, the ‘higher’ form of Scorpio, 
stands for water (the High Priestess). The angel is mixing the basic 
duality, inseparably combining the different sides of life that 
previously appeared hopelessly alien to each other. Now, the eagle 
stands for the higher Scorpio because Scorpio represents the energy 
of the unconscious, As the lower form, the scorpion, this energy 
shows itself primarily as sexuality, the ‘animal desires’ of the 
undeveloped personality. When the energy has been transformed by 
channelling it through awareness it becomes the eagle of spirituality. 
Strength showed this energy brought out in the form of the lion; in 
the BOTA Temperance we see the process completed, the eagle and 
the lion combined. 

The angel resembles the Greek goddess Iris, whose sign was the 
rainbow; a rainbow appears on the BOTA card and iris flowers on 
the Rider pack version. Rainbows appear as a sign of peace after a 
storm, which reminds us that Temperance shows the personality 
released by the fearful experience of Death. The rainbow comes 
from water yet shines as light across the sky, an emblem of the inner 
self, which once seemed dark, chaotic, fearful, brought out and 
joyously transformed into the promise of new life. In Jewish and 
Christian tradition the rainbow is a sign of renewal after the Flood. 
The Flood, like Shiva's destruction of the universe, stands 
psychologically for the death of old patterns, which do not reflect the 
truth and joy of life and which lead people into ‘evil’ - behaviour 
destructive to themselves and to others. 

As Zeus’s messenger Iris travelled to the underworld to fill her 
golden cup with water from the River Styx. The Greeks believed 
that dead souls travelled across the Styx to the land of the dead. 
Only a descent into the underworld of the self can renew life* 

Religiously the angel symbolizes the immortal soul liberated by 




98 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


death. If you look closely below the collar you will see God’s name 
worked into the fabric of the gown. In Christian tradition the soul 
will become joined with God after the resurrection. The triangle 
within the square indicates that the Spirit rises from within the 
material body. 

Psychologically the angel indicates the energy of life which 
emerges after the ego’s Death. The triangle now shows that this 
energy works within the square of ordinary activities. We do not 
need to perform miracles to sense our connection with the immortal 
universe. We need only be ourselves 

Remember that the Tetragrammaton appeared on the W’heel as a 
mystery of fate. Here the name has become part of us. We become 
‘masters’ of our fate when we learn to deal with life as it comes and 
not according to routines of habits and defences. 

The divinatory meanings, like the card’s ideas, begin with 
moderation, balance in all things and taking the middle path. The 
card means right action, doing the correct thing in whatever 
situation arises. Very often this means doing nothing. The 
intemperate person always needs to be doing something, but very 
often a situation requires a person to simply wait. The card will 
sometimes appear as an antidote to cards of recklessness and 
hysteria. 

Temperance signifies mixing disparate elements together, 
blending activities and feelings to produce a sense of harmony and 
peace. Because it means balancing and combining the different sides 
of life Temperance carries a special significance for the Minor 
Arcana. If a reading shows a person split between say, wands and 
cups, activity and passivity, or cups and pentacles, fantasy and 
reality, then Temperance, moderation and acting from an inner 
sense of life, can give a clue to bringing these things together. 

Like the Fool reversed Temperance upside down indicates a 
wildness, going to extremes. In Temperance this is because the 
person lacks the inner awareness to know what is appropriate to a 
situation. The trump reversed can act as a warning that you have 
allowed your life to become fragmented and that you are sliding 
from one extreme to another. It can in fact indicate failure in the 
great task of letting old habits and fears die away into the past. On a 
simple level the reversed Temperance tells us to calm down and 
avoid extremes; in its deepest sense it sends us back to Strength to 
begin that long, sometimes painful, sometimes frightening, but 
always essentially joyous process of death and rebirth. 




t 


Chapter 6. 

Tye Great Journey 

The Goal of Enlightenment 

ost people find fulfilment when they have destroyed 
the mask of the persona and are able to return to the 
ordinary world, renewed. However, there have always 
been people who have sought something greater - a 
complete union with the spiritual foundations of 
reality. For them it is not enough to simply sense this spirit running 
through their lives. They wish to know this force in full 
consciousness and their enlightenment, teachings and example 
enrich the rest of us. For these people the achievement of the second 
line is a preparation and a clearing away of obstacles. 

In its truest form life is simply pure, undifferentiated energy in 
which everything living exists at once. There are no forms, no parts 
and pieces of eternity. Consciousness protects us from such 
overwhelming experience. It breaks down the totality of life into 
opposites and categories. In the Hanged Man and Temperance we 
partly reach beyond these limiting illusions to a sense of life’s great 
power, and a sense of ourselves as part of that power. But even in 
Temperance the illusion of separateness returns. The card below 
Temperance is called the World because it is through experiencing 
it we and the universe become one. 

The line begins with a paradox, a seeming fall into the illusions of 
the Devil. By pursuing the meaning of the card at this particular 
place we come to a new understanding of what is involved in 
liberation. At the beginning of the Major Arcana we said that 
darkness and light were bound up together. The dark unconscious 
side, however, lay hidden in the temple of the High Priestess, to be 
experienced only through intuition. To get beyond the veil we must 
first go into the darkness of the self. Many religions celebrated the 
passage through darkness to the land of eternal life. When the 





100 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Christian Church established its religion of light it banished all 
evocations of darkness as evil. The common image of the Devil is 
simply a mixture of the Greek god Pan and various other 
competitors of Christ. 

The Tower’s meaning depends on how we view the Devil. If we 
see the Devil as simply illusions then the Tower shows them 
shattered by violent upheaval. However, if the Devil signifies release 
of repressed energy then the illusion shattered by the lightning is 
nothing less than the veil of consciousness itself. 

In each line the middle three cards form a special group. For the 
first it was the triad of nature, society, and education; for the second 
it was the change, through Justice, from the outer vision of the 
Wheel to the inner experience of the Hanged Man. In the last line 
the three cards show the passage from the inner revelation of the 
Star back to the consciousness of the Sun. In between, filled with 
strangeness, lies the Moon. 

The Sun is not the end. Once more we descend into darkness to 
experience, in Judgement and the World, a total joining with the 
universe and the spirit that fills it. We are now able to act in the 
outer world while never losing that sense of vastness and wonder 
within. The Magician and the High Priestess united in one joyful 
dance. 




THE GREAT JOURNEY 


101 



Figure 16 


The Devil 

Why does this grim figure of oppression appear so late in the Tarot? 
After achieving the balance of Temperance why fall so abruptly? 
The Devil bears the number 15, which reduces to 6, the Lovers, and 
in fact, we can say that Waite worked backwards from the Devil 
when he designed his radical version of the Lovers. Thus in the 
Rider pack the Devil, with his captured demons, appears as a 
perversion of trump 6. But why the ‘true’ card so early and the 
perversion so near the end? 

The Devil introduces the last line. This hints that it provides some 
vital energy for the work of that line. Now, the line deals with 
archetypal forces beyond the self. Does the road to enlightenment 
take us through the dark world of the Devil? Remember that Dantg 
goes through Hell before he can reach Purgatory and Paradise; and 
that William Blake, the occultist and poet, described the Devil as the 
true hero of Milton’s moralist poem Paradise Lost. 

In order to understand the esoteric value of the Devil we must first 
consider its more usual meanings as a force of illusion and 
oppression. The main illusion is materialism, a term which we 
usually think of as an over concern with money, but which more 
properly means the view that nothing exists beyond the world of the 
senses. The Devil perches on a block of stone similar to the 











102 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Emperor’s cube in the BOTA deck. But where that cube symbolized 
the entire universe the Devil’s rectangle, half a cube, indicates a 
incomplete knowledge. 

Denying any spiritual component to life the materialist pursues 
only personal desires - monetary, sexual and political. Since such 
narrowness often leads to unhappiness the Devil has come to 
symbolize misery. When we look at the two figures, however, we do 
not observe any discomfort in their faces or posture. Notice also that 
the chains do not really hold them; the large loops can easily come 
off. The Devil’s power rests in the illusion that nothing else exists. In 
a great many situations, from political oppression to the personal 
misery of a bad family life, people only become consciously unhappy 
when they realize that life holds other alternatives. 

The Devil’s posture, one hand up, one down, recalls the 
Magician. Where trump 1 raises a wand to heaven, bringing down 
spiritual power, the Devil’s torch points to earth, signifying the 
belief that nothing exists beyond the material. 

The Devil’s palm bears the astrological glyph for Saturn, a planet 
often seen as symbolizing evil or misfortune, but more properly 
viewed as limitations, weaknesses or restrictions. The outspread 
fingers plus the number 5 in 15, recall the Hierophant’s two fingers 
up, two down. Where the latter gesture signified that there was more 
to the universe than what you can see before you, the Devil’s open 
palm indicates again that nothing exists beyond the obvious. 

The Devil wears a reversed pentacle, a symbol of black magic, on 
his forehead. Now, the pentacle carries a great many significances. If 
you stand with your feet apart and your arms out you will see that 
the pentacle symbolizes the human body. The right way up the head 
is uppermost and when we reverse the pentacle the genitals are 
above the head. In traditional Christian teaching the power of 
reason, the ability to tell right from wrong, rules the desires. 
Therefore, the reversed pentacle indicates letting your desires 
overpower your judgement. The Devil’s torch inflames the man’s 
tail, and people who experience their sexual needs as both over¬ 
powering and destructive have often described it as a fire burning 
inside them. The card’s background is black, symbolizing black 
magic, the inability to see the truth and depression. 

Thus we see the Devil’s traditional meanings: illusion, 
materialism, misery and sexual obsession. And yet, the card carries 
a great force. The Devil stares out at us intensely. Practitioners of 
Tantra describe the kundalini as a fire in the body, beginning at the 
root of the spine, the tailbone, and evoked by sexual rites. 

Consider again the pentacle. The sex organs over the head. The 
image reminds us of the Rider pack Lovers, where the woman, 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 103 

symbol of the unconscious and the passions, looks to the angel. We 
can also recall Strength, directly above the Devil, where the lion 
symbolizes the animal energy raised up and tamed. We have already 
spoken of the occult belief that sexual and spiritual energy are 
actually one and the same, symbolized by Scorpio’s double image of 
scorpion and eagle. Strange as it sounds this idea is not really so 
mysterious. It takes neither an occultist nor a Freudian to recognize 
the great power of sex in our lives. How much of popular culture, 
y/ith its love songs, romantic movies, and sexual jokes and slang, is 
devoted to it? If, for the average person, the sex urge is so dominant, 
then it makes sense that the occultist should seek to tap this energy 
and raise it to such a level that eventually it becomes wholly 
transformed into the overwhelming experience of enlightenment. 

A more subtle point - dreaming is always accompanied by the 
body’s sexual arousal, an erect penis or clitoris, plus other 
indications. Now, a dream is the unconscious manifesting itself as 
images. The indication is that the unconscious is sexual in nature 
and that dreams are a partial transformation of that energy into a 
wider form. In fact, the term ‘unconscious’ does not really refer to 
the dreams and myths which reveal it to us, but rather to the great 
pool of energy which sustains us through life. 

Our Western culture has taught us that the body and the spirit 
are fundamentally opposed. We assume that the monk and nun 
abstain from sex so as not to contaminate themselves. But we can 
look at celibacy in another way. By refraining from sex the celibate 
can turn that energy in another direction. In India, the connection 
between sexual and spiritual energy has always been recognized. 
Shiva’s symbol is a phallus, while the Tantra rites call for copulation 
as a way of charging the body with energy. The Gnostics, a major 
influence on European occult ideas, practised rites very similar to 
Tantra. And the Gnostics, like Blake after them, considered Satan 
the true hero of the Garden of Eden, seeking to give Adam and Eve 
knowledge of their true selves. 

If the way to spirit leads through the desires, then why does 
society repress them? And if the path to liberation has been known 
and mapped out for centuries why keep it a secret? The answer to 
these questions lies in the terrible power of sexual-spiritual energy. 
If raised to the higher level it frees us from the limitations of duality. 
However, if the power is released and not transformed it can result 
in obsessions, sexual crimes, violence and even the destruction of the 
personality. It was not simply sexual politics that led the Greek 
patriarchs to attack the female-dominated mysteries of ecstatic 
rapture. Overwhelmed by the forces released within themselves, the 
worshippers would whip and mutilate themselves, and sometimes 





104 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


rage through the countryside, tearing to pieces animals, men and 
even children who were not safely locked indoors. It is only the 
person who has been trained, who has achieved a deep level of inner 
peace, who has, in fact, reached the understanding the Tarot calls 
Temperance, who can deal safely with the forces implied in the 
Devil. 

Actually, the Devil implies a great deal more than sexual rites and 
violent energy. On a wider sense it symbolizes the life energy locked 
up in the dark hidden areas of the self, which cannot be entered by 
ordinary means. It is called the Devil because for those who are not 
prepared to receive this energy it can manifest itself as monsters, a 
sense of the universe as filled with evil, or the temptation to indulge 
in violence. We said in the second line that the child develops a 
strong ego so it will no longer fear the darkness. The action of the 
second line gave us a glimpse of the dark waters beneath the Wheel 
of Life. The third line requires a complete release of unconscious 
energy. Such a flood can only come through entering that hidden 
area, with all its illusions, horrors, and desires which can so easily 
distract the unprepared from the final goal. 

Look again at the gestures of the Hierophant and the Devil. The 
priest’s two fingers held down signify that there is more to life than 
what we see; at the same time the fingers imply that the path to that 
deeper knowledge is closed. The Devil’s open fingers can symbolize 
the narrow illusion of thinking that what you see is all that exists; or 
it can symbolize seeing everything. Nothing hidden away. The 
specific gesture made by the Devil, with a gap between the two 
double fingers, is the gesture made by the High Priest in Jerusalem 
to bring down the spirit force. It survives today in the Jewish New 
Year celebration as part of the ‘priestly blessing’. 

Paul Douglas has called trump 15 the ‘dark side of the collective 
unconscious’. When the so-called ‘black magician’ (once a title for 
the Devil) conjures a demon he or she is actually bringing out a force 
from inside the self. If the operation goes successfully the magician 
masters the demon, making it his or her servant. That is, the 
magician uses the liberated energy rather than falling a prey to it. 
To do this, the magician must be purified of ego desires and of fear. 
In short, he or she must have achieved Temperance, otherwise the 
demon can ‘win’ the encounter. The magician becomes a slave to the 
illusions of the Devil. 

We have gone quite deeply into a radical interpretation of the 
Devil. The card’s divinatory meanings tend to follow the more usual 
interpretations. We take the more obvious meanings because in a 
reading the card appears out of context. The Devil can indicate a 
narrow materialistic view of life; it can mean any form of misery or 




105 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 

^ depression, especially feeling chained or imprisoned, with the 
illusion that no alternatives are possible. If it appears in connection 
with the Lovers it shows that a relationship which began with love has 
turned into a trap. 

The Devil signifies being the slave of your desires, rather than 
acting the way you think is best. It can mean a controlling obsession, 
particularly a sexual one, where the person feels drawn to commit 
acts he or she finds morally repugnant. The extreme example is the 
sex criminal; on a much more common level many men and women 
find themselves powerfully attracted to people they actively dislike. 
The feeling of helplessness and shame which results from giving in to 
these desires belongs to the Devil. 

Earlier we observed the calm on the faces of the chained men and 
women. This indicates the acceptance of a bad situation. Eventually 
we come to view our unhappy conditions as normal, and may even 
fight against change. The Devil reversed, on the other hand, 
indicates an attempt to break loose from some misery or bondage, 
either real or psychological. The person no longer accepts his or her 
situation and moves towards liberation. Paradoxically it is precisely 
at such a time that we feel our unhappiness and the limitations of 
our lives most strongly. Before you can slip off the chains you must 
become conscious of them. Therefore, people who are undergoing 
some process of liberation - say, leaving home, psychotherapy or a 
difficult divorce - often find themselves far more unhappy than when 
they blindly accepted their oppressed condition. Such a period can 
be crucial to a person’s development. If one can survive it, one will 
emerge happier and with a more developed personality. Sometimes 
we can find the period of transition unbearably painful and slip back 
to our chains. 

The Devil reversed in the position of the past often means that the 
change has occurred, but the feelings of sadness, of anger, of 
depression remain, perhaps hidden from conscious view, but still an 
influence. We must often deal with the devils of the past, even those 
we have long ago overcome in practical terms. The psyche never lets 
anything go; it . never simply forgets about anything. The way to 
liberation lies in using and transforming the knowledge and energy 
bound up in every experience. 


106 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



THE TOWER. 


Figure 17 

The Tower 

Like the Devil, this trump carries a great many meanings, and the 
explanations given by most Tarot books indicate its surface moral 
lessons. The Tower is said to be the materialist conception of the 
universe, and the lightning the destruction that comes to a life based 
on purely materialist principles. Even here we find a great deal of 
subtlety. While it may appear that some outside force strikes down 
the narrow-minded person, the violence shown in the card actually 
derives from psychological principles. The person who lives only to 
satisfy the ego demands of wealth, fame, and physical pleasure, 
ignoring both introspection and the spiritual beauty of the universe, 
raises a prison around himself. We see this person as the Tower; 
grey, rock-bound, with a gold crown. At the same time a pressure 
builds up inside the mind as the unconscious strains at its bonds. 
Dreams become disturbed, arguments and depression more 
common, and if a person represses these manifestations as well, the 
unconscious will often find some way to explode. 

The explosion may appear as an external disaster; your friends 
and family turn against you, your work collapses and violence of one 
kind or another swirls around you. And it is true that one of the 
mysteries of life is the way that bad luck comes in clusters. Yet, how 
many of these problems result from long neglected or mishandled 





107 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 

situations, striking us at the moment we become vulnerable? And if 
some problems, illness or death of people close to us, economic 
problems in society, even natural disasters, such as storms - or 
lightning bolts - appear at the same time as personal problems, such 
coincidence shows again that life does indeed contain more than we 
can see in front of us. 

We should not think that the psyche, or life, brings on disaster 
simply to punish us. The drops of fire falling on each side of the 
Tower are shaped like the Hebrew letter yod, the first letter of God’s 
name. They symbolize not anger, but grace. The universe, and the 
human mind will not allow us to stay forever imprisoned in our 
towers of illusion and repression. If we cannot free ourselves 
peacefully then the forces of life will arrange an explosion. 

I do not mean to imply that we in any way enjoy the painful 
experiences that shake us loose, or that we can see the beneficial 
ends from such means, or even that the process always results in 
freedom. Very often a series of disasters or a period of violent 
emotions will cripple a once strong personality. The point is only 
that given no other outlets the unconscious will erupt all around us, 
and that we can use this experience to find a better balance. Some 
decks call this card ‘The House of the Devil’; but others call it ‘The 
House of God’, reminding us that it is spiritual force which destroys 
our psychic prisons. 

There is a deeper meaning in the linking of God’s and the Devil’s 
houses, a meaning implied even more directly in the fact that the 
Hebrew for ‘snake’ bears the same numerical value (and is therefore 
seen as equivalent to) the word for ‘messiah’. The Devil is God’s 
shadow. In trump 15 we saw that the person seeking unity with life 
must bring out the energy normally repressed by the conscious 
personality. By embracing the Devil, however, we endanger that 
calm and balance shown in Temperance. We set the psyche on a 
violent course leading to the explosion of the Tower. Jung described 
consciousness as a dam blocking free flow of the river of the 
unconscious. Temperance acts as a kind of sluice, letting the waters 
through at a controlled rate. The Tower blows away the dam 
completely, releasing the locked up energy as a flood. 

Why take such a dangerous course? The answer is that no other 
way exists to finally go beyond the barrier of consciousness, or to 
break free from that which separates life into opposites and which 
cuts us off from the pure energy contained within ourselves. The veil 
across the temple is the conscious personality, protecting us from life 
itself. As mystics, shamans, and ecstatics have testified, eternity is 
all around us, blinding and overwhelming. The unprepared mind 
cannot encompass such power, and so consciousness comes to our 




108 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


rescue, closing off the major part of our spiritual energy, parcelling 
experience into time and opposing categories. 

The mystics tell us as well that revelation comes as a lightning 
bolt which destroys the illusions of the material world in a single 
blinding flash, like that seen by Paul on his way to Damascus, or 
that which struck Buddha under the Bo tree. No matter how long 
the meditation, the years of prayer or occult training, the truth 
comes all at once or it does not come at all. Which is not to say that 
the preparation was meaningless. The work shown in the first two 
lines of the Major Arcana serves a double purpose. Not only does it 
make us strong enough to withstand the lightning when it comes, it 
also puts us in a position to bring about the lightning. All occult 
practices begin with one assumption: that it is possible to call down 
the bolt of revelation, that a person can take definite steps to make 
this happen. 

These steps include the teaching, the meditations, the ego death, 
and finally the embracing of the Devil. By releasing that energy we 
get past the barriers of repression and open ourselves to the 
lightning. For the spirit exists all the time; it is we who are blind to 
it. By going into the darkness of the self we open ourselves to the 
light. 

Obviously, this is a dangerous process. The unprepared person 
can become trapped in the illusions of the Devil. We will see also 
that the release of energy carries its own dangers as the psyche tries 
to integrate it with the conscious awareness. The hero on the way 
back from the centre of the labyrinth can become lost if he has not 
carefully prepared himself. 

The Tower comes below the High Priestess, for it shows the veil 
being ripped away. At the same time the lightning recalls the 
Magician. That energy and truth which passes through the 
Magician here strikes in full force. We also see trumps 1 and 2 in the 
two people; one in blue, the other in a red cloak. The polarity 
symbolized in so many of the earlier cards is here overwhelmed by 
the unity of existence. Count the yod drops of fire and you will find 
that they come to twenty-two, the number of trumps. You will find 
also that they are separated into ten and twelve. The Sumerians 
used a number system based on ten (for ten fingers) for worldly 
matters, but a separate system based on twelve, for the zodiac, for 
spiritual counting. This duality is also an illusion. Both worlds are 
manifestations of the same spirit fire. 

. The image of a destroyed tower brings to mind the tower of Babel. 
On a literal level that story explains why people speak so many 
languages, while morally it teaches us not to put our faith in human 
abilities (the Tower as materialism). But we can see another 



109 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 

meaning in Babel’s destruction. The lightning that struck it was 
God speaking directly to humanity rather than indirectly through 
the ordinary phenomena of the physical world. 

In an instant the speech of God replaces the human speech that 
built the tower; revelation replaces the step by step knowledge of the 
senses. Remember that the descent of the spirit at Pentecost 
scrambles human language; people ‘speak in tongues’ or make 
animal noises. And the shamans in their trances speak the languages 
of the beasts and birds. Human language is an aspect of culture and 
a limitation of consciousness. Many linguists, notably Benjamin 
Whorf, have demonstrated that our languages restrict our ability to 
perceive reality, like a filter over the universe. And truth, the mystics 
tell us, cannot be expressed in words. 

The Tower’s 16 reduces to 7, the Chariot, linked by Case and 
others to human speech. The speech of God of the Tower destroys in 
a moment all the careful constructions of culture, language and 
consciousness. In so doing it returns us to the chaos of the sea 
beneath the Wheel of Fortune and the Pool of water behind the veil 
of the Priestess. 

In some ways the Tower is the most complex of all the trumps; its 
more subtle meanings are at odds with its obvious ones. Like the 
Devil its divinatory meanings usually derive from the obvious. It 
usually refers to a period of violent upheaval (either literally or 
psychologically), the destruction of long established situations, the 
break-up of relationships in anger or even violence. 

Because the card carries such furious significance many people 
recoil at the sight of it. The reaction raises the vital question of how 
to regard the Tarot’s more fearful images. We must learn to use all 
experience, the Tower as well as the Lovers. When the Tower 
appears it is necessary to remember that it can lead to freedom; the 
explosions are clearing away some situation that has built up 
intolerable pressure. They can lead to new beginnings. 

To say that the Tower’s appearance usually signifies difficult 
experience is not to insist that the deeper meanings will never arise. 
The card can mean a flash of enlightenment, particularly if such 
enlightenment replaces a limited view of life. Only the reader’s 
intuition and experience, as well as the hints from the other cards, 
can indicate the specific meaning. 

The Tower reversed indicates a modified version of the card’s 
meaning when the right way up. The violence and storm are still 
there but milder. At the same time the reversed trump carries the 
extra meaning of‘imprisonment’, to use Waite’s term. This paradox 
becomes resolved when we consider that when the right way up the 
Tower liberates. When reversed, then, the card means that we do 



110 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


not allow ourselves to undergo the full experience. By keeping a tight 
control on our reactions we lessen the pain; we also do not release all 
the repressed material. Within ourselves the painful experience 
continues, never having gone its full course. By shielding the Tower 
from the lightning we become its prisoners. 


Figure 18 

The Star 

After the storm, peace. The person who undergoes emotional 
upheaval finds afterward a sense of calm and emptiness. Lay the 
cards out for someone who has never seen them and the Star will 
hardly need interpretation. Everything in it speaks of wholeness, 
openness, and healing. 

It is worth comparing the Star with Temperance, where we also 
see a figure pouring water and holding two cups, with one foot on 
land and one in water. Both cards come after a crisis, but where 
Temperance is controlled the Star is free. Not clothed, but naked. 
Not standing stiffly, but supple and relaxed. And finally, where 
Temperance pours the water back and forth, blending but at the 
same time conserving, the Star maiden pours it out freely, confident 
that life will continually supply her with new energy. The picture 
suggests all those mythical chalices that could never be emptied. 

The Tower’s release of energy ripped away the veil of 





Ill 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 

consciousness. Here in the Star we are behind the veil. The pool of 
water, small though it is, represents the unconscious; that same 
water we saw concealed behind the pillars of the High Priestess. 
Now this universal life energy has been stirred up by the act of 
pouring the person’s own life waters into it. 

The water being poured onto land indicates that the energy freed 
by the Tower is directed outwards as well as inwards; it links the 
unconscious with the outer reality of the physical world. One way to 
describe the streams of water is as the archetypes of myth, the 
images through which the unconscious expresses itself. The 
unconscious is a whole, without shape or division, but it emerges 
into awareness through the separate streams of mythology. With the 
Star we have gone beyond myth to its source as formless energy; as 
light coming out of darkness. The transformation of darkness into 
light is the unconscious, the hidden vastness within us, changed into 
the ecstatic awareness of super-consciousness. 

One stream of water flows back into the pool, signifying that all 
archetypes blend back into the formless truth. The value of the 
archetype lies only in its power to arouse the inner self and to 
connect us to the source. The maiden’s foot does not penetrate the 
water. The collective unconscious has not been entered, but only 
stirred up. • 

The bird on the right is an ibis, a symbol of the Egyptian god 
Thoth, who was considered the inventor of all arts, from poetry to 
pottery. Literally he taught the first artists their techniques, but on a 
more symbolic level, we can say that all creative action stems 
originally from the pool of unformed energy. It is one function of 
being a physical creature that we take this energy and use it to make 
poems, paintings and tapestries. All these human creations are 
symbolized in those several streams of water. Every act of creation 
objectifies spiritual energy in the thing created. At the same time no 
work exhausts the artist’s inspiration as long as he or she remains 
connected to the inner sources. Therefore, the one stream returns to 
the pool, just as each work gives its creator new inspiration. 

The Star appears below the Empress and the Wheel. In the 
Empress we saw the natural world glorified in the passions. But the 
Empress was heavily clothed to indicate that she expresses her 
emotion through things outside herself- nature, lovers and children. 
In the Star we see the inner self joyfully experiencing itself. The Star 
maiden combines the two female archetypes, the inner sensitivity of 
the High Priestess brought out and expressed with the passion of the 
Empress. 

In the Wheel of Fortune we saw a vision of the universe in 






112 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


mysterious symbols. Here the Tower has taken us beyond visions. In 
the Star we directly experience the unconscious, rather than its 
images. 

As trump 17 the Star goes beyond 7, with the Star releasing the 
life force that the Chariot controlled and directed. 1 plus 7 equals 8, 
and we can see that the Star is Strength raised to a higher level, with 
the lion of desire no longer simply tamed, but transformed into light 
and joy. 

The stars on the card are all eight pointed which is another 
reference to Strength. Since an eight pointed star can be formed by 
placing one square over another with the points alternating, the 
octogram is sometimes thought of as halfway between the square 
and the circle. The square stands for matter and the circle for spirit. 
Human beings are the link between the spirit and the physical 
world; our ability to both feel the truth, and to act, makes us vehicles 
through which the truth can manifest itself. 

The Church used to describe humans as halfway between the 
animals and the angels. Usually a moral interpretation was given; 
people could follow their desires or their reason. But we can use this 
metaphor to say that human awareness and action connect the 
physical world to the ‘angels’. 

Despite all the suggestions of manifestations the Star is not really 
a card of action, but of inner calm. In contrast to Temperance and 
the Moon, the Star shows no road leading back from the pool to the 
mountains of outer reality. Though the streams and the ibis imply 
the uses of creative energy, the experience of the Star is one of peace. 
For the moment, the journey can wait. 

In divinatory readings the card expresses hope, a sense of healing 
and wholeness, especially after emotional storms. Very often the 
Star and the Tower suggest each other even when only one actually 
appears. Trump 17 indicates the unconscious activated, but in a 
very benign way. 

Reversed, we close ourselves off from the card’s calm and hope, 
experiencing weakness, impotence, and fear. This deep insecurity 
can sometimes mask itself as arrogance. If the Star indicates the 
human as a link between the spirit and the outer world then the card 
reversed symbolizes the channels closed, and when the waters of life 
are dammed up inside, the outside can only become tired and 
depressed. 




THE GREAT JOURNEY 


113 



THE MOON . 


Figure 19 

The Moon 

The true task of the third line is not revelation but bringing that 
inner ecstasy back to consciousness. The Star contained no road 
back. It shows us dwelling in the glories of darkness transformed 
into light. To use that light we must pass through distortion and 
fear. 

The Star experience lies beyond words or even form, though it 
implies forms emerging with the streams of water. In the Moon we 
see this process happening, as visions, myths and images. The Moon 
is the card of the imagination as it molds the energy of the Star into 
shapes that the consciousness can comprehend. 

Myths are always distorted. They can never really say what they 
want, they can only appeal to things deep within the self. The Star 
stirred up the waters; as we return to outer awareness those waters 
give forth their creatures. Remember that the Star and the Sun give 
off their own light, but the Moon reflects the hidden light of the Sun. 
The imagination distorts because it is reflecting inner experience to 
the outer mind. 

As the world’s mythologies demonstrate the collective 
unconscious contains monsters as well as heros, fear as well as joy. 
This is one reason why we cover our sensitivity to life with the 
protective layer of ego consciousness, so we will no longer fear the 




114 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


dark and the distorting shadows of the Moon. 

The Moon’s eerie half-light has always brought out strange 
feelings in people and animals. One word for madness, ‘lunacy’, 
derives from ‘luna’, Latin for moon, and in the Middle Ages people 
believed that the souls of the insane had flown off to the moon. 
Today, too, many doctors and police have observed the prevalence 
of suicides and other signs of disturbed emotions during the full 
moon. Something about the moon excites fear and strangeness, just 
as the sun relaxes and consoles us. The Tarot Sun comes after the 
Moon; simplicity can only be appreciated after a journey through 
the lunar strangeness. 

The dog and the wolf represent the ‘animal self’ roused by the 
Moon, just as a full moon can set both creatures howling all night 
long. The Emperor, directly above trump 18, showed us learning the 
rules of society so well that they become automatic. With the last 
line we go beyond this ‘super ego’ repression; in the process the ‘id’ 
wildness comes to the surface. A werewolf howling under a full 
moon is a vivid metaphor of the power of the unconscious to bring 
out something primitive and non-human in the most respectable 
people. 

As 18 the Moon relates to 8. Strength saw the animal nature 
tamed, and channelled through the Hermit. Here no such direction 
is given; as we come back from the Star the beast returns in all its 
wildness. Only when the Star energy is fully integrated in the World 
will the animal self be wholly transformed. Notice that in Strength 
the woman, the human side, controls the lion. Even in the Devil the 
demons appear clearly human. But there are no people on trump 18. 
In that half-light our sense of ourselves as human breaks down. 

We sense something of the Moon’s wildness in the aftermath of a 
nightmare, when we feel strange within ourselves. The wild 
sensations are not the result of the nightmare; it is more the other 
way around. We said earlier that dreams are transformations of 
unconscious energy into images. A burst of energy which is too great 
for the dream mechanisms to peacefully assimilate can result in both 
a nightmare and the feeling when you wake up of the body being 
charged with wild energy. 

Madness is also accompanied by uncontrolled sensations in the 
body. Very often lunacy takes the form of transformation into an 
animal. People will crawl on all fours, naked, howling at the moon. 
A sudden release of unconscious energy has disintegrated the 
personality. In the Tarot this very dangerous moment happens only 
after long preparation, with all the normal ego problems left behind. 
The shaman too experiences a transformation into a beast. Shamans 
will leap about and speak as animals during their trances. But the 




115 


f THE GREAT JOURNEY 

shaman, like the occultist, has prepared himself with years of 
preparation. He is also armed with the knowledge of what to expect, 
handed down from the generations of shamans who have gone 
before. Remember that the Moon’s number adds up to 9, the 
Hermit. The teacher-guide of that card is not visible, for we must 
* face the Moon alone, but the guidance given beforehand can help us 
find our way. 

If the animals symbolize the savage in man, the crayfish is 
something very different. In one of his most vivid phrases Waite calls 
it ‘that which lies deeper than the savage beast’. It symbolizes the 
most universal fears within the collective unconscious, experienced 
in visions as nameless demons. The emergence of such terrors is a 
well known occurrence to people who expose their lunar side 
through such methods as deep meditation or drugs. They are also 
seen as monsters encountered by shamans on their trance journeys. 
The arousal of these fears, often experienced as creatures emerging 
from water or pools of oily liquid, can produce unreasoning panic. 
Yet these images belong to our inner world; we cannot reach the 
Sun without passing them. 

The crayfish half emerges from the water. Waite tells us it never 
comes completely onto land but always falls back again. The deepest 
errors are the ones that never fully take shape. We feel something 
inside, but we can never see just what it is. At the same time the half 
emerging crayfish suggests that in the journey back to consciousness 
the deep perceptions of the Star become distorted because we cannot 
bring it all back. For this reason too the Moon is disturbing, because 
the peace and wonder of the Star have become partially destroyed 
and lost. 

And yet, despite the wildness, the fearful excitement, the cool 
light can calm as well. The Moon is said to increase on the ‘side of 
mercy’, a reference to the pillar of mercy on the Qabalistic Tree of 
Life. Even more striking, the drops of light falling on the animals’ 
heads are, again, yods; the first letter of God’s name and symbols of 
grace. If, through preparation and simple courage, we accept the 
wild things brought out by the deepest imagination, then the Moon 
brings peace, the terrors subside, and the imagination leads us back, 
enriched, with its wonders. Waite writes, ‘Peace, be still; and there 
shall come a calm upon the waters.’ The crayfish sinks back, the 
waters settle. The road remains. 

The road leads through two towers, suggesting a gateway into 
unknown areas. The gateway is a very common symbol among 
mystics and shamans, seen also in many myths. Sometimes a 
circular pattern, like the mandala, or some physical formation, like a 
cave (very often compared to the vagina), the gateway allows us to 



116 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


leave the ordinary world to enter the strangeness of the mind. 

The Tarot’s two towers carry another meaning, as the last 
complete manifestation of that duality we first saw in the pillars of 
the High Priestess’s temple. If the revelation of the Tower is not 
integrated with ordinary life then a new and more acute duality may 
result. At the same time, the very fact of having heard the speech of 
God totally changes our relation to the question of opposites. 
Previously duality was seen as basic to life, but we now know that in 
fact reality combines all things; where before the veil kept us from 
passing between the two pillars, here we have already passed 
through. We are looking at the two towers of consciousness from the 
other side. The task is not to pierce through to the inner truth but to 
take back that truth. 

In divinatory readings the Moon indicates an excitement of the 
unconscious. We begin to experience strange emotions, dreams, 
fears, even hallucinations. If the card appears the right way up then 
the person will allow this to happen. When accepted, the 
imagination enriches life. But if the card appears reversed, it shows a 
struggle against the experience. This struggle leads to fear and often 
very disturbed emotions as the person does not allow the Moon’s 
calming side to emerge. 

Like the High Priestess the Moon indicates turning away from 
outer concerns and becoming introspective. It can indicate giving up 
some specific activity or simply a period of withdrawal. However, 
whilst the High Priestess symbolizes quiet intuition, the Moon is 
excited, stimulating images from the unconscious. Again, the Moon 
reversed signifies a disturbance. The person does not wish to turn 
away from the solar side, and may try to fight off the Moon by a 
great deal of activity. The Moon, however, will not be denied, and 
the fears can get stronger the more we fight it. The psyche, operating 
under its own laws for its own reasons, has turned to the Moon. If 
we allow ourselves to experience it the fears will turn to wonders and 
the gateways open to adventure. 




THE GREAT JOURNEY 


117 




1 xliuu ll 



\ i j 



& 

mWfel# 





i * 'C> ‘ > 5 



\ ■ JL . ' j 



s Hyn' 



am i* i Li ime 



* • * 1 * 

• • 1 \ . * 



• 

• 

| THE SUN . 


Ic $olril P 





fa) Figure 20 (b) 

The Sun 

Like the Hanged Man above it the Sun is both a joyful release after 
the test shown in the previous card and a preparation for the death 
and rebirth in the two cards following. Justice required action as a 
response to the knowledge gained about ourselves. As a result the 
Hanged Man is passive. The Moon requires passive surrender, since 
there is no way we can control the visions rising under its influence. 
Therefore, the Sun shows an active, energized state. By accepting 
the Moon’s fearful images we bring the energy outside ourselves, 
giving all of life a radiance. 

Under the Sun everything becomes simple, joyous and physical. 
The light of the unconscious brought into daily life. The two 
children in the Oswald Wirth version, on the right, above the more 
common image for the trump, are sometimes called the eternal self 
and the mortal body. Holding hands, they have joined together. The 
two figures with the Sun above them returns us to the triangular 
motif first seen in the Hierophant two lines above. Here the joy and 
simplicity of the Sun does not mediate between the inner and outer 
poles of life but joins them together. 

We are all children, in the way that sun religions speak of us all as 
holy children of our father, the sun. If you look at the bodies, in the 
picture, especially the female, you will see that they are adults. The 










118 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

successful passage from the Tower has given them a childlike 
simplicity. 

The Tarot shows this passage in its various stages, giving the 
impression of the passage of time. Sometimes, however, perhaps 
most often, it happens all at once, the blinding revelation of the 
Tower, the inner radiance of the Star, and the acute fear of the 
Moon, all joined in a single instant of transformation. And the 
aftermath is joy, a sense of all life and all the world being filled with 
a wondrous light. 

Among all people enlightenment bears the same characteristics, 
whatever the cultural interpretation through mythology, doctrine, 
psychological theory, etc. Enlightenment is an experience, not an 
idea. The person feels struck by a burst of light, sometimes coloured, 
like the yod drops in the Wirth card. Suddenly the world is seen or 
felt, as spiritual and eternal, rather than the day to day existence of 
drudgery and confusion. The person feels totally alive with a 
childlike joy that, in fact, most children probably never know, for the 
sunstruck person has gone beyond the child’s fear of darkness by 
travelling through it. 

In its journey across the world the sun sees everything, and so 
represents knowledge. Gods associated with the sun, like Apollo, are 
said to know everything that happens. The sunstruck person feels a 
sense of wisdom, of seeing everything with total clarity. He or she is 
‘lucid’, a word which means clear and direct, but which literally 
means ‘filled with light’. 

It is interesting that Apollo, god of light, was born from Leto, 
goddess of night, and that his major shrine, the oracle at Delphi, 
belonged originally to goddesses of darkness. Even under Apollo’s 
direction the wisdom and light of the oracle operated out of 
darkness. It was Apollo who forced Oedipus to discover the mystery 
within himself. 

The spring sun brings forth life out of the dead winter ground. In 
many places it was believed that the sun impregnates not only the 
soil, but all women. When the biological means of reproduction was 
discovered the role of the sun was not dropped but made more 
subtle. People now saw the soul - the atman or true self - as sunlight 
contained within the embryo. Buddhist myth states that Gautama, 
in his mother’s womb, was all light so that her belly shone like a 
translucent screen over a powerful lamp. Zoroaster too blazed so 
powerfully in his mother’s womb that the neighbours ran with 
buckets, thinking the house had caught fire. 

The Gnostics carried this idea further, believing that the Fall had 
broken up the godhead into the bits and pieces of existence. Most 
important, the light had become imprisoned (rather than simply 


119 


THE GREATJOURNEY 

contained) in individual bodies. It was each person’s duty, through 
the Gnostic rites, to release the light within his body so that unity 
could be restored. The Qabalist Isaac Luria preached a similar 
doctrine. The Tree of Life, or Adam Kadmon, the unity of existence, 
had been shattered because the god light was too powerful for it. 
Again, the light became separated and imprisoned, so that it was the 
responsibility of each person to aid in ‘tikkun’, that is, restoration of 
the light to unity. 

These doctrines derive from the Sun experience common to all 
cultures. The sunstruck person sees everything, each person, each 
animal, all the plants and rocks, even the very air, alive and holy, 
united through the light that fills all existence. And yet, the Sun is 
not the World. With trump 19 we perceive the universe as unified 
and alive. 21 embodies those feelings. 

The usual drawing for the Sun shows the children within a 
garden, often standing in a circle. Douglas calls this the ‘inner 
garden of the soul’, a feeling of purity and holiness, a new Garden of 
Eden. When we liberate and transform the energy locked inside us 
we find that the Garden of Eden was never really lost, but has 
always existed within us. 

The Rider pack shows its single child riding out of a garden. For 
Waite the Sun experience was essentially a burst of freedom. It was 
a breaking loose, a wonderful liberation from ordinary restricted 
consciousness to openness and freedom. 

The grey, stone wall in the picture represents the past life, bound 
by a narrow perception of reality. The super-consciousness of the 
Sun is characterized by feeling a part of the whole world rather than 
an isolated individual. We can perhaps combine the two images for 
the trump by saying that once you realize that the Garden of Eden 
exists within you, you are free to leave it, taking it with you always 
as you create a new life. 

• The number 19 suggests a higher level of 9. The light contained in 
the Hermit’s lantern, the wisdom of his teachings, here bursts forth 
as Abulafia’s ecstatic third level of Qabalah. We said of the Hermit 
that the old man and the bleak mountain were illusions required 
because the inner self could only be reached through withdrawal. 
Here the truth has emerged and the robed stiff Hermit is 
transformed into a gloriously open child. The other half of 19 is 1. 
The Magician force joined to the Hermit wisdom is super¬ 
consciousness. The energy of life united with its meaning and 
purpose. 

1 plus 9 equals 10, the Wheel of Fortune whose vision was of 
something outside us that we tried to comprehend. Here we see life 
in a visionary way from inside ourselves. And in this kind of vision 







120 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

there are no mysteries and no symbols, only the universe, filled with 
light. 

The Sun’s divinatory meanings are as simple and direct as the 
wondrous children in the pictures. The card signifies joy, happiness, 
and a great sense of the beauty of life. In its deepest sense it means 
looking at the world in a wholly new way, seeing all life united in joy 
and light. Above all it is a card of optimism, energy and wonder. 

Reversed, the good things do not become lost but confused, as if 
the sun had become clouded over. Life is still giving the person a 
time of simple happiness, but it cannot be seen so clearly. The 
person is no longer lucid and must work to realize the joy which is 
the great gift of the Sun. 



Figure 21 


Judgement 

Under the Sun we see all of life as filled with spiritual light. This 
awareness of eternal truth frees us from all illusion and fear so that 
now we feel, like a call from deep inside, the urge to dissolve 
ourselves completely into the spirit and wondrous life contained in 
every being. 

This call comes from both inside and outside us, for one of the 
effects of the Sun was to break down the artificial barrier between 
inner experience and the outer world. We feel the call in our deepest 
selves as if the very cells of the body were filled with a shout of joy. 





THE GREAT JOURNEY 121 

At the same time, we recognize that the call comes from some force 
greater than any individual life. 

This idea of Judgement as a call to rise to a more meaningful 
existence has its analogues in more ordinary situations. Sometimes 
in life a person can come to a crossroads (notice the cross in the 
banner) where a decision is required on whether to make some great 
change. And sometimes it can seem as if something within the 
person has already decided and the only choice left to the conscious 
self is to follow with the appropriate action. The old ways of 
believing and thinking, the old situations, have died without 
ourselves even noticing. 

Most versions of the trump show only the angel and the figures 
rising up. The Rider pack adds a range of mountains in the 
background. Waite calls them the ‘mountains of abstract thought’. 
The term implies eternal truth beyond the limited knowledge 
available to us through ordinary means. 

One of the basic features of morality is the inability to know 
anything in an absolute sense. We are bound by our short lives and 
by the fact that all knowledge comes to our minds through the 
medium of the senses. In modern physics we learn that scientific 
investigation can never form an exact picture of reality because the 
observer is always a part of the universe that he or she is observing. 
In the same way, each person’s thoughts about and perceptions of 
life are influenced by that person’s past experience. ‘Abstract 
thought’ implies, like the Platonic ideals, a sense of the absolute. 

W'e reach this ‘abstraction’ by making one last descent into the 
waters of nothingness in order to rise up liberated from all partial 
knowledge. Death, directly above, showed a dissolution. There the 
ego was dying and the trump emphasized the fear of letting go. Here 
all illusions of isolation are dissolved, and the emphasis rests not on 
the death but on the resurrection. 

We call the card Judgement because, like Justice, it involves 
coming to terms with past experience as a part of going beyond it. 
With Justice the experience and the response were personal, based 
on your actions in the past. Here a force greater than yourself is 
leading and calling you, and the Judgement is not simply on the 
meaning of your own life but on the true nature of existence, and the 
way in which you and all beings are a part of it. 

At times in this book we have referred to the Hebrew letters 
assigned to the different trumps. Usually we have followed the 
system in which the Fool is Aleph. There is another system, where 
the Magician receives Aleph, and in that system Judgement bears 
the letter Resh. Resh means ‘head’ and refers, like Waite’s 
mountains, to the true mind awakened by the call. Resh also 







122 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


suggests Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year, literacy ‘head of 
the year’. Now, Rosh Hashanah is not the start of the calendar, like 
the secular New Year, but represents, in fact, the anniversary of 
creation. Similarly, Judgement indicates not a change of 
circumstances but a new consciousness, one directly acquainted 
with the truth through a merging of yourself with the forces of life. 

The Wheel of Fortune, with its invisible laws of psychic cause and 
effect, was 10; Judgement is 20, 10 multiplied by 2. Through the 
workings of the last line we reveal the High Priestess’s hidden 
wisdom so that now we understand the inner mysteries concealed in 
the Wheel. 

The cross in the banner indicates a meeting of opposites, a joining 
of all the things that had been separated. It symbolizes a meeting of 
two kinds of time; the ordinary time we perceive with our senses and 
by which we live from day to day, and eternity, the spiritual 
perception of life. These two times are symbolized by the horizontal 
and vertical lines of the cross. Their meeting in the centre indicates 
that the higher self does not abandon its old activities but goes about 
them in a new way. 

The card above Judgement is the Lovers and, in the Rider pack, 
also shows an angel. There, however, the angel was a glimpse of a 
greater truth experienced through the medium of love. Here the 
angel leans down from the cloud to call to us. In the traditional 
version of the Sun we saw the final example of that triangular motif 
begun in trumps 5 and 6. Here we see a child between the two 
people. The poles of life have come together to form a new reality, in 
the way that every child is both a combination of its parents and 
something completely new. 

The child in front stands with his back to us. The new existence is 
a mystery, with no way for us to know what it will be like until we 
experience it. The child’s hidden face also implies that we do not 
really know ourselves, and that we cannot until we hear and respond 
to the call. Virtually all mythologies contain stories of the hero 
separated from his parents and raised as an ordinary child, with 
other people, and very often the child himself, knowing nothing of 
his true identity. King Arthur, Moses, Theseus, and Christ all follow 
this pattern. We see this same idea in many science fiction stories, 
where the hero awakes in a strange place with no memory; his 
search for his true identity leads him to discover great powers within 
himself. Very often he finds himself in the centre of either a powerful 
plot or at the very workings of nature. We have all ‘forgotten’ our 
true identities and have become separated from our ‘parents’. And 
when we find or create our true selves, we will find ourselves at the 
centre of the universe. For the centre is everywhere. 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 123 

Most decks show only the three people in the foreground. Waite’s 
addition of three more people, all facing us, suggests that while 
Judgement leads to the unknown, there is still an awareness (also 
symbolized as well by the mountains) of the ways in which the 
unknown life will develop. 

The extra people imply another, very vital point. By showing a 
whole group rising the trump reminds us that there is no personal 
liberation. Each human being is part of the human race and 
therefore responsible for the development of the race as a whole. No 
one can be truly free while someone else is enslaved. Buddha was 
said to have come back as a boddhisatva because he understood that 
he could not liberate himself until he had liberated all humanity. At 
the same time, any single liberation liberates everybody. This is 
because any person’s attainment of Judgement and the World alter 
the circumstances of everybody’s life. Gautama’s Buddahood and 
the resurrection of Christ are seen as events that have totally 
changed the world. 

In the divinatory readings the card of Judgement carries a special 
significance. Whatever else is going on around you, there is a push, a 
call from within, to make some important change. The change can 
refer to something mundane and immediate, or to an entire shift in 
the way a person looks at life - depending on the other cards, and 
the subject of the reading. The important thing is the call. In effect, 
the person has already changed; the old situations, the old self, have 
already died. It is simply a matter of recognizing it. 

Judgement reversed can indicate that the person wishes to answer 
the call but does not know what to do. More often it shows someone 
trying to deny the call, usually from a fear of the unknown. There 
may, in fact, be a great many rational reasons why the person 
should not follow the suggested change: lack of money, lack of 
preparation or responsibilities. Judgement, the right way up or 
reversed, indicates that all the objections are excuses. When the card 
is upside down the excuses become dominant; the person remains 
standing in the grave. The word Judgement impliesthat the reality 
of life has changed. The only choice is to follow. 




124 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 22 


The World 

What can we say of an understanding, a freedom and rapture 
beyond words? The unconscious known consciously, the outer self 
unified with the forces of life, knowledge that is not knowledge at all 
but a constant ecstatic dance of being - they are all true and yet not 
true. 

We have already observed a great deal about this card and its 
images. The number as well as the two wands unify the Magician 
and the High Priestess. We saw the World foreshadowed as well in 
the Wheel of Fortune, and reflected how the symbols of that trump 
are now living realities. One way or another, the Wheel has come up 
for virtually every card in the last line. The purpose of this line can 
be described as that of uniting ourselves with all those things seen in 
trump 10 as external vision, that is, fate, the workings of life, the 
elements of existence. When the unity is achieved the symbols 
vanish, dissolved into a dancing spirit. 

We saw the World in the Hanged Man, by number and picture. 
Trump 12 maintained its bliss through complete inactivity. But even 
the World Tree is an illusion created by the mind’s need to grasp 
onto something. When we have dissolved our isolated selves into 
that water lying beneath the Hanged Man’s glowing face we learn 
that true unity lies in movement. 




125 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 

Everything in the universe moves, the Earth around the sun, the 
sun within the galaxy, the galaxies in clusters, all cycling around 
each other. There is no centre, no place where we can say, ‘Here it 
all began, here it all stops.’ Yet the centre exists, everywhere, for in a 
dance the dancer does not move around any arbitrary point in 
space, but rather the dance carries its own sense of unity focused 
around a constantly moving, constantly peaceful centre. Nothing 
and everything all at once. 

And so we return to the Fool. Innocence and emptiness, united 
with wisdom. As we said at the beginning, of all the Major Arcana 
cards, only these two are moving. The oval wreath suggests the 
number 0, with all its symbolism. It implies as well the cosmic egg, 
the archetype of emergence; all things exist in potential and all 
potentials are realized. The self is everywhere in all things. The 
sashes at the top and bottom of the wreath are tied into infinity 
signs, indicating that the self is not enclosed but open to the 
universe. 

The sashes are red, the colour of the root chakra in Kundalini 
symbolism. The dancer has not lost her physical being, her root in 
material, sexual reality. Instead, the energy is constantly flowing, 
transformed and renewed. The green of the wreath symbolizes the 
natural world raised up rather than abandoned. Green is also the 
colour of love and healing, radiating wholeness to everyone, even 
those who are not consciously aware of it. Purple (the banner) is the 
colour of divinity and blue (the sky) the colour of communication. 
When we know that divinity is not something out there, but within 
ourselves, then our very presence communicates this truth to those 
around us. 

One of the World’s analogues is Shiva, Lord of the Cosmic Dance. 
He too dances with the arms out, one foot down and the other 
raised, the head balanced and the expression calm. The right foot of 
both figures is ‘planted’ in the physical world, while the raised left 
leg symbolizes the soul’s release. When we become most joined to 
life, at that moment we realize our freedom. The face is neither sad 
nor joyful but at peace, free in its emptiness. The arms are open to 
all experience. , 

Dancing Shiva is usually depicted as an hermaphrodite, one half 
of the body Shiva, the other Parvati, his female side. The World 
dancer is also hermaphroditic, the dual sexual organs concealed by 
the banner, as if to say th^t the unity they represent lies beyond our 
knowing. In discussing the Lovers we referred to the widespread 
belief that all people were originally hermaphrodites. The dancer 
expresses and unites all the different sides of being. 

The same feeling that leads us to a ‘memory’ of primeval 





126 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


hermaphroditism has taken people a step further to the image of the 
entire universe having once been a single human being. We find this 
belief among the Gnostics, in Blake, in German, Indian, and other 
mythologies, and in great detail in the Qabalah. There the figure 
bears the name ‘Adam Kadmon’ and is said to be the original 
creation emanating from the unknowable God. Rather than a 
physical being, Adam Kadmon, also hermpahroditic, was described 
as pure light. Only when the figure broke up into the separate parts 
of the universe did the light become ‘imprisoned’ in matter. It is a 
fascinating fact that the contemporary scientific theories of 
cosmogony describe the universe as originally one particle. At the 
moment that the particle broke up it was all pure light; only later, as 
the pieces became more isolated did some of that energy condense 
into matter, following Einstein’s famous formulation, E=mc 2 . 

The myths consider the break-up of primeval Man an irreversible 
event. Occultists, however, believe in the possibility of restoration. 
By following the process outlined in the Major Arcana we become 
united with life and so ourselves become Adam Kadmon and Shiva- 
Parvati. 

Adam Kadmon it linked to the Tree of Life, with its ten sephiroth, 
or points of emanation. We have already seen the connection 
between this figure and the Tarot through the Tree’s 22 paths. The 
World Dancer, by her posture, is an exact representation of the Tree 
of Life’s most common form. The Tree is drawn in the following 
way: 


O-O 



O 


O 

O 


O 

Very simplified, the top triangle is super-consciousness, the 
middle is consciousness, the bottom the unconscious, and the final 
point, the root of the Tree, is the manifestation of all these principles 
in the physical world. 

In the Dancer the top triangle is the crown of the head and the 
points of the shoulders, the middle triangle is the hands and the 





127 


THE GREAT JOURNEY 

genitals, the bottom triangle is the crossed leg and right foot. At the 
same time it is all one body. By contemplating the dancer we learn 
that the unconscious, conscious and super-conscious are not 
separate parts or even separate stages of being, but are all one. But 
what about the tenth sephira, the root of the Tree? We find it not in 
the body but in all the universe, the wonderful ground of being in 
which we move. 

Descriptions, metaphors, even contemplation can only hint at the 
wonders embodied in trump 21. When the card comes up in 
divination these wonders become further reduced to the ordinary 
situations with which most readings concern themselves. The card 
means success, achievement, satisfaction. To greater or lesser degree 
it indicates a unification of the person’s inner sense of being with his 
or her outer activities. 

Reversed, the trump indicates stagnation, the movement and 
growth slowed down to the point of being stopped. Or so it seems. In 
fact, the freedom and rapture of the World exist always in potential, 
to be released when the person feels ready to begin, once more, the 
dance of life. 

These are the meanings of the World in divination. Its true 
meanings are unknowable. They are a goal, a hope, an intuition. 
The way to that goal, the steps and music of the dance, lies in the 
living images of the Major Arcana. 








Bibliography 

Butler, Bill, The Definitive Tarot (Rider and Company, London, 
1975) 

Case, Paul Foster, The Tarot, A Key to the Wisdom of the Ages (Macoy 
Publishing Company, Richmond, Virginia, 1947) 

Crowley, Aleister, The Book of Thoth (Samuel Weiser, New York, 
1944)* 

D’Agestino, Joseph, Tarot: The Royal Path to Wisdom (Samuel 
Weiser, New York, 1976)* 

Douglas, Alfred, The Tarot (Penguin, London, 1972) 

Eliade, Mircea, Shamanism (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
1964) 

Gray, Eden, The Tarot Revealed (Bantam, New York, 1969) 

Haich, Elizabeth, Wisdom of the Tarot (New York, 1975) 

Kaplan, Stuart, The Encyclopedia of Tarot (U.S. Games, Limited, 
1978)* 

Malory, Thomas, Work, ed. Eugene Vinaver (Oxford, London, 
1959) 

Scholem, Gershon, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (Shocken, New 
York, 1941) 

Scholem, Gershon, On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism (Shocken, New 
York, 1965) 

Waite, Arthur Edward, The Pictorial Key to the Tarot (University 
Books, New York, 1910, 195.9). All quotations from Waite are 
taken from this book. 

Wang, Robert, An Introduction to the Golden Dawn Tarot (Aquarian 
Press, Wellingborough, 1978) 

Williams, Charles, The Greater Trumps (Victor Gollancz, London, 
1932) 


•U.K. Distributors: Thorsons Publishers Limited, Wellingborough, 
Northamptonshire. 



SEVENTY-EIGHT 

DEGREES OF 

WISDOM 

A BOOK OF TAROT 

Parti: tIjc Minor Arcana 
and Readings 

Rachel Pollack 



AQUAftAN 


THE AQUARIAN PRESS 
Wellingborough, Northamptonshire 





First published 1983 


©RACHEL POLLACK 1983 


This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way 
of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise 
circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published and with¬ 
out a similar condition including this condition being imposed on 
the subsequent purchaser. 


British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Pollack, Rachel 

Seventy eight degrees of wisdom 
pt.2. Minor arcana and readings 
1. Tarot 2. Symbolism(Psychology) 

I. Title 

133.3'2424 BF 1879.T2 
ISBN 0-8530-339-7 


Cards from the Rider- Waite Tarot deck reproduced by permission 
of the Hutchinson Publishing Group Limited 

The Aquarian Press is part of the Thor sons Publishing Group 


Printed and bound in Great Britain 






Contents 



Introduction 

Page 

7 


THE MINOR ARCANA 

23 

Chapter 


1 . 

Wands 

25 

2. 

Cups 

48 

3. 

Swords 

71 

4. 

Pentacles 

94 


READINGS 

121 

5. 

Introduction to Tarot Divination 

123 

6. 

Types of Readings 

136 

7. 

Howto Use Tarot Readings 

182 

8. 

What We Learn from Tarot Readings 

199 


Index 

207 



For Joan Goldstein, who knows that the best cards are the ones that 

tell the truth. 




S”*tn 


THE RIDER PACK 

In 1910 the Rider Company of London published a new Tarot 
deck, designed by the well-known occultist Arthur Edward 
Waite, and drawn by a lesser-known psychic artist named 
Pamela Colman Smith. Waite himself apparently did not 
expect a wide public for these new cards; like all his works, his 
book on the Tarot speaks primarily to people already involved 
in the occult tradition. And yet the Rider pack, as the deck 
came to be called, is now known all over the world - in its 
original version, in pirate editions, in thinly disguised ‘new' 
Tarots, in several different sizes published by Rider alone, in 
illustrations for novels, books on psychology, comic books and 




8 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


television shows. The outstanding popularity of this particular 
esoteric Tarot over hundreds of other traditional and modern 
decks derives largely from one aspect of the cards that Waite 
himself seems hardly to have noticed - the draw ings of Pamela 
Colman Smith which revolutionized the Minor Arcana. 

In his apologia for his deck Waite took great pains to defend 
certain changes he made in the design and number of the 
cards in the Major Arcana. However, most newcomers to 
Tarot* comparing the Rider pack (centre, above) to say, the 
more traditional Marseilles deck (left, above) will have to look 
quite closely before they observe most of these changes. They 
will immediately see the difference in the Minor cards. In 
every deck designed before the Rider pack the 'pip cards, 
numbers 1-10 of the four suits, bear geometric patterns con¬ 
taining the number of swords, or w'ands, or cups, or coins. In 
this they resemble their descendants, ordinary playing cards. 
In most decks these patterns are plain and repetitious. The 
elaborate Crow'ley deck (right, above) stands out as the excep¬ 
tion. The Waite-Smith deck, however, has an illustration on 
every card. 

Primarily concerned with the more esoteric Major cards, 
Waite apparently did not realize how this rich variety of 
scenes would captivate the average viewer seeking to experi¬ 
ment with Tarot. In a way, their very newness adds to their 
charm. Where the Major Arcana strikes us with the ancien¬ 
tness as well as the complexity of its symbolism, the Minor 
cards, having no pictorial tradition, appear to us as scenes 
taken directly from life, or in some cases, fantasy. 

The fact that Smith drew' these scenes in a pseudo- 
mediaeval style seems not to bother most people. They find 
the liveliness more important. Almost all the Major cards 
show a figure sitting or standing; only the Fool and the World 
move. In fact, they dance. But in the Minor cards, all the 
scenes show something happening , rather like a frame from a 
movie. 

The contrast is no accident. The Major cards depict 
archetypal forces rather than real people. The Fool and the 
World Dancer move, because only they fully embody these 
principles. But the Minor cards show aspects of life as people 
actually live it. In these four suits, and more especially in the 
combinations they form when we lay them out in readings, we 
find a panorama of experience, constantly showing us new 






INTRODUCTION 


9 


insights into the wonders of human nature and this magical 
world. 

Precisely because it shows ordinary life rather than a formal 
system the Rider pack does not appeal to many occultists. 
While a great many subsequent decks have copied, with small 
or large variations, the Rider pack, other decks, including 
ones we might characterize as 'most serious', such as the 
Crowley or the Builders of the Adytum deck, have returned to 
the use of patterns for the pip cards. They do so because their 
creators concerned themselves with the Tarot as a system of 
organizing and structuring esoteric practices, both as a tool 
and as a living force. '1 he Tarot, for them, forms a vital link to 
mystical systems. 

The most important of these links is that connecting the 
four suits to the four worlds described in the Qabalah. 
Qabalists view the universe as existing in four stages, the 
closest to us (and the furthest from direct union with God) 
being the ordinary material world, called Assiyah, the 'World 
of Action'. For greater understanding the mediaeval theoso- 
phists described each world as embodied in a Free of Life, a 
diagram of cosmic law. Now, the structure of the Tree does 
not change in the different worlds. Each tree contains ten 
Sephiroth, or archetypes of emanation. (For the Tree’s most 
common pattern, see the Pen of Pentacles.) And here, of 
course, the Tarot comes in. Because the four suits each 
contain ten pip cards, we can place the cards on the Sephiroth 
to give us a concrete aid in meditation. And because the 
Sephiroth represent archetypal forces, most occultists prefer 
abstract designs to emblemize them. For them, a scene of 
people doing something, such as three women dancing, or a 
group of boys fighting, only distracts from the eternal sym¬ 
bolism. 

Some occultists go further, believing that the geometric 
patterns on the cards carry a psychic power all their own, and 
that by looking deeply at these patterns in their special 
colours, we can produce certain distinct effects within the 
brain. 

Many people who are not especially esotericists will still 
prefer the older decks to any of the modern interpretations, 
including the geometric ones. For them, the sense of a tradi¬ 
tion, of meanings developed over centuries, carries a power no 
revised edition can equal. In readings they look to the ancient 



10 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


formulas and find the Rider pack’s detailed scenes a distrac¬ 
tion. Often the more psychic readers will use the older cards, 
finding that the very abstractness of the pip cards helps trigger 
clairvoyant awareness. 

For most of us, however, the repetitious patterns sharply 
limit the insights available from either studying the cards 
alone or using them in readings. Once we have memorized the 
formulas attached to each card we find it difficult to go 
further. In this book I have attempted to create what I call a 
‘humanistic’ Tarot, derived not just from esoteric truths, but 
also from the insights of modern post-Jungian psychology to 
give a rounded picture of who we are, how we act, and what 
forces shape and direct us. In such a Tarot the goal is not fixed 
meanings, but rather a method by which each person can gain a 
greater insight into life. While the analysis of each card will 
come partly from its use in readings, with right side up and 
reversed meanings, the analysis will show primarily how that 
card adds to our knowledge of human experience. 

Because the Rider pack shows such vivid scenes the 
formulas or commentaries belonging to each card serve only 
as starting points. We can ponder the pictures themselves, and 
how they combine with the pictures around them. In a way 
the pictures and each person’s imagination (and experience) 
act as a partnership. In every reading, or in each meditation or 
reflection, we can look at each card as a fresh experience, just 
as the more esoteric decks work best for occult discipline, and 
the older decks for fortune-telling, so the Rider serves those of 
us who use the cards primarily for awareness of self and of the 
world around us. 

The Smith pictures attract people through their cartooon- 
like action. They hold us over years because of the very real 
meanings contained in their pictures. How did Pamela Smith 
do it? As far as we know, she created her pictures with no 
tradition to assist her. In Part One of this book I stated my 
opinion that Waite probably did not dictate the designs as he 
clearly did with the Major cards. His own book gives no 
account of their origins; nor does he defend the radical 
change, as he does his changes in the Major cards. His 
interpretations, moreover, do not utilize the new pictures to 
any great extent. Though he briefly describes each picture his 
explanations are usually formulas and catch phrases (‘desire, 
will, determination, project’), no different in substance from 


INTRODUCTION 


11 


those meanings attached to earlier decks. 

Some writers have claimed (though I have not found any 
evidence for this in Waite’s own writings) that Smith drew the 
pictures as four comic book-like stories, one for each suit. The 
quality of the suit determined the character of the story, in 
which the court cards formed a family and the pips events 
happening to them. The so-called Moroccan Tarot, based 
very closely on the Rider pack, follows this system. This story 
explanation for the pictures begs the question. The important 
question remains the relation of the picture to the meaning. 

I suspect Waite gave Smith the formulas he wished 
illustrated, perhaps consulted with her on the picture, and 
then Smith’s artistic instincts took over, at times working with 
the surface symbolism and at times operating beyond the level 
of conscious choice. Waite’s formulas derive from various 
sources. Waite himself speaks at times of contradictory 
meanings, as if he had consulted different fortune-tellers. His 
arrangement of the court cards also shows the influence of the 
Order of the Golden Dawn, a secret society of mystic- 
magicians, to which Waite and Smith (like Crowley and Paul 
Foster Case, designer of the BOTA deck) at one time 
belonged. 

In many cases, of course, the pictures are very simple and 
directly related to the meanings they were meant to illustrate. 
The Four of Pentacles, for example, shows the image of a 
miser, someone ‘cleaving’ to the ‘surety of possessions'. But is 
it coincidence or plan that these four pentacles cover the 
crown of the head, the heart and throat, and the soles of the 
feet, thereby leading to deeper interpretations than simple 
greed? And in many cases, the picture touches something in 
us beyond the meaning officially connected to it. Look at the 
Six of Swords, supposedly a ‘journey by water'. The dream¬ 
like silence, the sadness implicit in the picture suggest the 
mythical journey of dead souls across the River Styx. 

I do not mean to describe Waite as bland, or insensitive to 
the pictures in his own deck. Sometimes his comments, 
especially on the pictures, increase our understanding beyond 
the simple list of meanings. In that Six of Swords he observes 
that ‘the freight is light’, and this, along with Eden Gray’s 
comment, ‘The swords do not weigh down the boat’, leads us 
to contemplate the image of a spiritual or emotional journey in 
which we carry our memories and sorrows with us. In the Two 


12 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


of Wands Waite gives two opposed meanings and then says 
that the picture ‘gives a clue' to their resolution. At other 
times, however, the meaning given contradicts the picture, as 
in the Two of Swords, where a powerful image of isolation and 
defence supposedly illustrates ‘friendship'. 

Since the Rider pack quite a few Tarot designers have 
attempted to include a scene on every card. Just about all have 
paid tribute to Pamela Smith's images, some extremely 
closely, while others have imaginatively transformed the Rider 
pictures. Nothing compels them to use these images; they 
carry no authority of ancient tradition, as do the Major cards. 
Their authority derives from creative achievement. These 
crudely drawn pictures, awkward, often out of all proportion 
or perspective, based on sentimental ideas of the Middle Ages, 
somehow have led thousands of people into an understanding 
not just of the cards but of themselves. In one stroke Pamela 
Smith created a new tradition. 

THE FOUR SUITS 

However much the depiction of the individual cards broke 
with previous practice, Waite stayed close to earlier decks in 
his arrangement of the suits and their emblems - with one 
exception. Where older decks, going all the way back to the 
fifteenth-century Visconti-Sforza deck, used Wands (or 
Staves), Cups, Swords, and Coins (or discs), the Rider pack 
substituted Pentacles - five pointed stars enclosed in gold 
discs - for the final suit. Waite made this change for two 
reasons. First, he wanted his fourth suit to represent the full 
range of the physical world, not simply the narrow 
materialism of money and business. Second, he wanted the 
four suits to carry the four basic tools of ritual magic. In 
reality the two reasons are one. Waite knew that magicians 
used these objects partly because they symbolized in concrete 
form the various aspects of the physical/spiritual universe. 

The association of these four emblems with both magical 
practice and the spiritual truth underlying life goes back at 
least as far the the Middle Ages, where we find their equiva¬ 
lents in the symbolic objects carried by the Grail maidens. 
Waite himself knew these objects from his experience in 
magical Orders. The Rider pack also depicts them as lying on 
the table before the Magician in the Major Arcana. 


INTRODUCTION 


13 


In the Tarot, as in magic, the four emblems stand for the 
world itself and for human nature, as well as the act of 
creation (both the creation of specific things, and the con¬ 
tinuous creation of evolution). Their place on the Magician's 
table signifies that he or she has become a master of the 
physical world. In one sense mastery means the real powers 
over nature that many people seek in magic. Those who use 
the Tarot as an esoteric discipline sometimes maintain that 
meditation and ritual with the Minor Arcana will give the 
adept control over the forces of nature. In Charles William’s 
Tarot novel, The Greater Trumps , he carries this idea to 
dramatic extremes when the hero raises a hurricane by 
flapping together the cards associated with wind. In psy¬ 
chological terms ‘mastery’ of the Minor Arcana means under¬ 
standing, in ourselves and in the world around us, all those 
experiences and forces depicted in the cards. A ‘master’ means 
a person who has control over his or her life - who is master 
over him or herself. 

Such a goal is a great deal harder to achieve than many 
people might think. It means really knowing who we are, on 
unconscious levels as well as conscious. It means knowing why 
we act the way we do, knowing our true desires instead of the 
muddled ideas most people have of their goals in life. It means 
knowing the connections between seemingly random 
experiences. The Tarot can at least help us increase our 
understanding in all these things. How far each person goes 
depends on, among other things, that person's relationship to 
the cards. 

The number four has figured very strongly in human 
attempts to understand existence. Because our bodies suggest 
this number (front and back, right and left sides) we tend to 
organize our perceptions of the ever shifting world by breaking 
things down into fours. The view of the year as four seasons 
comes also from the two solstices and the two equinoxes. 
(Cultures without astronomical awareness will often divide 
the year into the two basic seasons of summer and winter, or 
sometimes into three seasons.) 

The zodiac contains twelve constellations, three times four. 
Therefore we find the signs of astrology divided into four 
groups of three. One ‘fixed’ sign in each group gives us the 
four ‘strong points' of heaven. We see these four represented in 
the Major Arcana on the cards of the World and the Wheel of 


14 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Fortune as the four beasts shown in the cards’ four corners. 
(The very shape of cards, and for that matter most Western 
houses, demonstrates our four-sided bias. The ancient 
Chinese used circular playing cards.) The four creatures sym¬ 
bolize the zodiac, but they derive most directly from Ezekiel’s 
vision in the Old Testament, later repeated in Revelation. 

Of all the four symbolisms the two that pertain most 
directly to the Minor Arcana are the four elements of 
mediaeval alchemy and the four letters of God’s name in 
Hebrew, the tetragrammaton. Our modern concept of the 
atomic elements derives from an earlier idea (originating in 
ancient Greece) that all things in nature are formed out of four 
basic constituents: fire, water, air, and earth. We find this idea 
not just in Europe but also in cultures as diverse as China and 
North America. The elements sometimes change; sometimes 
the numbers change also, from four to five, adding ‘ether' or 
Spirit to the four elements of nature (just as many cultures 
add the ‘centre’ as a fifth direction). The basic concept, 
however, remains the same - that everything can be reduced 
to its basic parts, that the world combines these basic qualities 
in an infinity of ways. 

Today, we carry this idea much further, reducing all matter 
to sub-atomic particles (throwing out the idea of Spirit 
altogether, except in certain rarefied theories of contemporary 
physics) and looking upon the mediaeval ‘elements as very 
elaborate chemical combinations. However, we are mistaken 
if we think that the old system can no longer teach us 
anything. For one thing that characterizes the old view - and 
indeed the views of virtually all cultures before the modern 
West - is the non-separation of physical, spiritual, moral, and 
psychological theories and values. For us the element of, say, 
helium, carries very little if any spiritual meaning. For the 
mediaeval thinkers the element Fire suggested a whole range 
of associations. Obviously we would be wrong to reject the 
great achievements of knowledge we call modern science. But 
neither should we reject the insights from earlier times. 

In the Tarot we see the four elements as Fire-Wands 
(Staves), Water-Cups, Air-Swords, Earth-Pentacles (Coins). 
Different writers sometimes give variations on this listing, 
most often switching Wands and Fentacles, on the grounds 
that sticks grow out of the earth, and coins are forged in a fire. 
I have chosen to stay with the more common listing because of 


INTRODUCTION 


15 


the wider associations of fire and earth. Fire is not simply a 
human tool, but a great force in nature, seen most powerfully 
in the sun which brings the staves out of the ground. Earth 
stands not only for the soil, but traditionally for the entire 
material universe of which Coins represent a small part and 
Pentacles a much wider part. 

If we wish to see the world in terms of five rather than four, 
including Spirit centre, then the Major Arcana stands for 
Ether, the fifth element. The fact that we set it apart from the 
four Minor elements symbolizes the intuition that Spirit 
somehow exists on a different level from the ordinary world. 
At the same time the fact that we mix all five together for 
readings helps us see that in reality Spirit and all the elements 
of matter constantly work together. Working with the Tarot 
helps us understand the dynamic ways in which Spirit gives 
meaning and unity to the material world. A true understan¬ 
ding of this relationship, in practice as well as theory, forms a 
great step towards that 'mastery’ described earlier. 

Many people will know the imagery of the four elements 
from astrology, with its four ‘triplicities’: Fire - Aries, Leo, 
Sagittarius; Water - Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces; Air - Gemini, 
Libra, Aquarius; Earth - Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn. Jungian 
psychology also utilizes the four elements, linking them to 
basic ways of experiencing the world. Fire stands for Intuition, 
Water for Feeling, Air for Thinking, and Earth for Sensation. 

In astrology and Jungian thought the elements stand for 
types and characteristics. In the Tarot we see these types 
reflected in the court cards. The suits as a whole show- 
activities and qualities of life rather than individual psy¬ 
chology. In other words, if Wands dominate in a reading we 
do not say that the person is a 'fiery' character, but rather that 
she or he is currently going through many Fire experiences. 
We study the four suits separately to learn just what we mean 
by Fire or Water or Air or Earth experience. We study them 
together in readings to learn how life in reality embraces and 
combines all the elements together. 

As a brief summary, Wands/Fire stand for action, move¬ 
ment, optimism, adventure, struggle, business in the sense of 
the activity of commerce rather than the things sold, 
beginnings. Cups/Water stand for reflection, quiet experi¬ 
ences, love, friendship, joy, fantasy, passivity. Swords/Air 
stand for conflict, angry or disturbed emotions, sadness, but 


16 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

also for mental activity, wisdom, the use of intellect to under¬ 
stand the truth. Pentacles/Earth stand for nature, money, 
work, routine activities, stable relationships, business in the 
sense of things made and sold. Also, because Pentacles are 
magic signs, they stand for the magic of nature and the 
wonder of ordinary life, not always perceived, but often 
hidden under the surface. 

Drawing on another well-known symbolic system Wands 
and Swords represent ‘yang' or ‘active' situations, while Cups 
and Pentacles stand for ‘yin - or ‘passive' ones. We can also 
substitute, with reference to the Major Arcana, Magician for 
yang and High Priestess for yin. Whatever the terminology, 
these distinctions become clearer in the imagery. Both wands 
and swords are used for striking; cups, on the other hand, 
fulfil their function by receiving and holding water; while 
pentacles, as either magic signs or money, can influence the 
world without physically moving. Similarly, fire and air are 
constantly shifting, while water and earth tend more to 
inertia. 

A little reflection, as well as a look at the pictures, will show- 
how these separate categories actually blend together in 
reality. Both Wands and Pentacles deal with business, both 
Wands and Swords indicate conflict. Cups and Wands tend 
towards happy, positive experiences, while Pentacles and 
Swords often represent the more difficult sides of life. At the 
same time, Cups and Swords cover the general range of 
emotions, while Pentacles and Wands depict the more 
physical activities. Rather than showing rigid separations the 
cards tend toward combinations and the blurring of all 
distinctions. 

In Part One I wrote that the study of Tarot readings teaches 
us above all that no quality is good or bad except within the 
context of an actual situation. We learn also from readings 
that no situation, quality, or personal characteristic exists in 
isolation, but only in combination with others. In a reading we 
look first at the individual cards in their individual positions, 
but we understand what the reading tells us when we see how 
the cards blend together into a whole pattern. Similarly, we 
study the cards individually but we understand them fully 
only when we see them working. 

The different elements represent not only different 
experiences but also different approaches to life. One reason 


INTRODUCTION 


17 


to study the suits as a whole is to see the advantages and 
problems of each approach. For each suit we will look at a 
‘problem’ and a ‘Way to Spirit'. As an example, the problem 
for Cups is passivity, the Way to Spirit is love. Through the 
different images we see how the Cups experiences bring out 
these qualities. 

In arranging the cards I have followed Waite's example in 
moving from the King down to the Ace, rather than the other 
way round. Because kings (as traditional symbols rather than 
political reality) bear a responsibility for maintaining society, 
and because the king gives an image of maturity, the four 
Kings all symbolize the most socially-minded stable version of 
the suit. The Aces, on the other hand, signify unity and perfec¬ 
tion. Therefore, the Aces stand for the elements in their purest 
form. The Ace of Wands stands for Fire itself and all that it 
means, while the other thirteen Wands cards depict some 
specific example of Fire, either in a situation (cards 2 - 10) or 
as a personality type (the court cards). 

In the Rider pack we see each Ace held in a hand coming 
out of a cloud. This symbol, seen also in other decks, teaches 
us that each element can lead us to spiritual mystery. It also 
teaches us that all experience is a gift, from a source we cannot 
consciously know, unless we follow the deep spiritual journey 
showm in the Major Arcana. For this reason I have ended each 
suit with the Ace. 

THE TETRAGRAMMATON 

Besides the four elements we should look at the other symbol 
implied by the four suits, that of God’s name. We find these 
four letters, Yod-Heh-Vav-Heh, arranged in the Wheel of 
Fortune, the tenth card of the Major Arcana. In European 
letters we write them as YHVH, or sometimes IHVH. 
Because the Bible gives no vowels for the name we cannot 
actually pronounce it; it therefore symbolizes God’s unknow¬ 
able nature, the essential separation between God and man 
that characterizes Western religion. Writers have assigned the 
names Jehovah or Jah or Yahweh to those letters, but this 
leads to confusion. When we consult the writings of the 
Qabalists we discover that the letters do not form a ‘name’ in 
the human sense of a label that stands for a person, but rather 
they depict a formula. And that formula describes the process 
of creation. 


18 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


The tetragrammaton and the four elements do not really 
form two separate systems, but in fact one unified symbol. 
Each of the elements belongs to a letter, Yod-Fire, Heh- 
VVater, Vav-Air, Heh-Earth,* and when we apply God’s name 
to the elements we complete the meaning of their symbolic 
differences. 

The process goes as follows: Yod, or Fire, symbolizes the 
start of any enterprise, the first creative spark, the energy 
needed to begin. In mythic terms the Yod indicates the divine 
spark emerging from the unknowable God. In psychological 
terms it stands for the impulse to begin some specific project, 
or new way of life. The first Heh, Water, symbolizes the actual 
beginning as the spark is ‘received’ into a pattern. Mythically, 
this refers to God’s Fire touching the ‘Waters of the deep', that 
is, the chaos before God began to order the universe. Psy¬ 
chologically we understand that our plans and hopes remain 
formless, vague, until the Fire energy enters into them and 
starts us actually doing something. At the same time, restless 
Wands energy cannot benefit us unless we give it a definite 
purpose. 

The third letter, Vav, connected to Air, symbolizes the 
development of the plan, the directed purposeful movement 
that makes everything take shape. In its holy sense, it means 
the stage of creation in which God gave the world its underly¬ 
ing form. Air stands for intellect, and psychologically Vav 
indicates the mental process of going from a goal to an actual 
plan which will bring the project into reality. 

Finally, the second Heh, Earth, stands for the finished 
creation, the thing itself. In religious terms it means matter, 
the physical universe, that which God created through the 
process of the other letters. In human terms it means the com¬ 
pletion of the goal. 

Let us take the example of a poem. It cannot begin without 
an impulse towards poetry and a desire to express something. 
At the same time this desire goes nowhere unless we can 
choose a particular subject. In a sense the subject ‘receives’ 
the impulse to write. Still, the poem will never emerge until we 
work on it, using intellect and the writing of several drafts to 
solve the problems of imagery, rhythm, and so on. Finally, the 

*These links come from Tarot tradition. Some Qabalists use a 
slightly different order. 


INTRODUCTION 


19 


process ends when we can hold the actual poem in our hands 
and pass it on to others. A little thought will show that the 
same development holds true for any action, from building a 
house to brewing beer to making love. 

Clearly the last element, Earth, stands somewhat apart 
from the others. 1'he mathematician and occultist, P. 1). 
Ouspensky, has drawn this relationship in the following 
diagram: 



A look at the Hebrew letters will also help us understand 
the svmbolism. Reading right to left they are: 

m rr 

Notice how the Yod, the Fire letter, hardly has any shape at 
all, but resembles rather a point, the flash of a first impulse. 
Observe too that the two Hehs vaguely resemble upside down 
cups, or beakers. The first one ‘receives' the impulse, the 
second ‘receives' the entire process and gives it a physical 
form. Finally, observe how the third letter, Vav, extends the 
first letter, Yod. The intellect, Air, takes the Fire energy and 
gives it a definite direction. 

It may seem at first that the fourth element, Earth, can exist 
by itself. However, in order for us to find any meaning in our 
possessions we must understand the creative processes that 
brought them into being. When we look at the ‘problems’ 
relating to each suit, we see that each arises only when we 
remove the suit from its relationship to the others. Or, in other 
words, when we lean too much in one direction in life. Earth’s 
problem of materialism, is counteracted through adding 
Cups, for emotional appreciation. The way in which one suit 
is ‘added’ to another will be discussed in the section on 
Readings. 


20 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


THE GATE CARDS 

If the Rider Minor cards serve us primarily as a commentary 
on ordinary life, they do not ignore or cut us off from deeper 
perceptions. On the contrary, the philosophical bias of the 
cards leads us always in the direction of‘hidden forces' giving 
shape and meaning to ordinary experience. A truly realistic 
view of the world (as opposed to the narrow materialist 
ideology commonly thought of as ‘realism’) will recognize the 
spiritual energy always present within the constantly shifting 
patterns of the world. Much of mainstream science is cur¬ 
rently moving away from the notion that such forces as 
electro-magnetism are static and mechanical, and towards the 
image of them as dynamic and constantly creative. 

The Rider pack greatly encourages such awareness. We see 
it celebrated in the Ten of Cups; we see it most directly in the 
Aces, where each element is shown as a gift. 

But the Rider pack does more than teach us this awareness. 
Certain cards, taken in the right way, can help produce it. 
Earlier, we considered the occult view that looking at geo¬ 
metric patterns will create effects in the brain. In a similar 
way joining ourselves meditatively to particular cards in the 
four suits will bring experiences reaching beyond the cards' 
specific meanings. 

I call these cards Gates, because of the way in which they 
open a path from the ordinary world to the inner level of 
archetypal experiences. Each suit contains at least one of these 
cards, the Pentacles containing the most. They all share cer¬ 
tain characteristics: complex, often contradictory, meanings, 
and a mythlike Strangeness which no allegorical interpreta¬ 
tion can completely penetrate. By choosing certain cards to 
fulfil this function I do not mean to imply that no others will 
do so, but only that in my experience these cards in particular 
do act in this way. 

Sometimes the Strangeness of a Gate will lie on the surface, 
but in other cards it only becomes apparent after we have 
analysed the card intellectually. The latter cases demonstrate 
a very important point - that outer and inner perceptions do 
not oppose each other, but rather bring each other out. The 
best approach to a Gate card begins with a knowledge of the 
card’s literal and symbolic meanings. When we have taken 
those as far as they will go we will arrive at the path of 



INTRODUCTION 


21 


Strangeness that lies beyond them. 

The Tarot demonstrates many things, some very unexpect¬ 
ed. These things emerge through interpretation of the Tarot's 
images, through joining ourselves to those images in medita¬ 
tion, and through seeing the combinations formed in readings. 
Taken separately, the cards of the Minor Arcana present us 
with a grand panorama of human experiences. Together, and 
in union with the archetypal Major cards, they draw us into 
ever wider knowledge of the changing wonder of life. 







Chapter i. 

Wands 



In one way or another, human beings have taken virtually all 
of nature as symbols for the spiritual essence of life. Of all 
these symbols fire stands out as the most powerful. We speak 
of the ‘divine spark’ in the soul, of someone being ‘on fire with 
an idea’, and when someone has become bitter or disillusioned 
we say, ‘the fire has gone out of him'. When God banished 
Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden and its 'Free of Life 
He set a cherub with a flaming sword to guard the entrance. 
By their Fall the first humans had alienated themselves from 
the heavenly lire. W'hen yogis, through meditation and 
exercise, cause the kundalini, or spiritual force, to rise, they 
experience this rising as a great heat moving up the spine. And 
shamans the world over demonstrate their spiritual power by 



26 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


becoming masters of fire, dancing in flames or holding hot 
coals in their mouths. 

Fire stands for the vital life essence that animates out- 
bodies. Without it we become corpses. Michelangelo's famous 
painting of creation shows a spark leaping from God’s finger 
to Adam’s. We describe the chemical changes of food in our 
stomachs as the body ‘burning fuel'. Fire symbolizes the very 
energy of existence. Because it rises, constantly leaping up¬ 
wards, fire stands for optimism, confidence, hope. To give 
human beings a touch of immortality and make them immune 
to Zeus’s threats of annihilation, Prometheus gave them fire. 

Because the Minor Arcana deals primarily with the outer 
range of experience Wands tend to show the way the inner fire 
shows itself in ordinary life. Besides the specific knowledge 
gained, a study of the Minor Arcana show's how mundane 
experience derives from a spiritual base. 

Wands, then, stand first of all for movement. Whether they 
w'in or lose Wands constantly struggle, not so much because of 
the actual problems or goals, but just for the love of conflict, of 
the chance to use all that energy. In business Wands stand for 
commerce and competition; in love they symbolize romance, 
proposals, the act of winning a lover rather than the emotion 
of love itself. Wands lead us to approach life with action and 
eagerness. 

When Wands succeed too greatly, as with the King, or the 
figure in Two, then a melancholy can grip them, for the 
rewards of success can tie them down. At other times, as in the 
Nine or Ten, they allow the habit of fighting or of taking on all 
problems, to blind them to more peaceful alternatives. 

Mostly, however, the Wands' influence shows us people 
wanning their battles. Through Wands we find the Way to 
Spirit in movement, action, living for the joy of living. They 
find their most powerful expression in the Four, dancing out of 
the walled city to celebrate the lifegiving power of the Sun. 

And yet, for all that vitalizing energy expressed in the Sun’s 
power to literally bring life out of the ground, fire also 
destroys. If not controlled and directed, that energy burns up 
the world. Therefore we see all the Wands court cards 
standing or sitting in a desert. Despite their optimism and 
eagerness Wands need the softening influence of Cups, for 
without water the summer sun brings only a drought. From 
Cups, then, comes a sense of depth and the ability to feel as 









WANDS 


27 


well as act. From Swords we get a sense of planning and direc¬ 
tion for all the energy. From Swords also comes an awareness 
of sorrow and pain to balance the Wands' optimism and con¬ 
quering spirit. And from Pentacles comes a sense of being 
rooted in the real world, an ability to enjoy life as well as to 
overcome it. 



Figure 7 

KING 

In readings, the court cards of each suit traditionally represent 
people who will influence the subject's life. While this is often 
the case, they can also symbolize the subject him or herself. 
Taken by themselves, that is, outside the context of specific 
readings, the sixteen court cards provide a greater range of 
human character. Either in a reading or by itself as an object 
of study any specific court card indicates a person having or 
expressing those qualities signified by that card. 

A King (or a Knight or a Page) does not necessarily mean a 
man, nor a Queen a woman. Rather, they show qualities and 
attitudes traditionally symbolized by those figures. The par¬ 
ticular social functions of a king, or a queen, or a knight, 
suggest certain experiences and responsibilities. The cards 
symbolize these as often as they stand for age or sex. 

We should also avoid the idea that a card might symbolize 
an individual person throughout life, in the sense of saying 



28 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


about someone, l She’s the Queen of Wands’, and thinking 
that sums up her life. A person might go through a Queen of 
Swords phase one month, and move to a Knight of Cups the 
next. Or experience both at once, in different aspects of her life 
at that time. 

A king is a ruler, responsible for the welfare of society. In 
the Rider pack all four Kings wear what Waite calls ‘a cap of 
maintenance’ underneath their crowns. Traditionally the king 
bears responsibility for maintaining his people. Therefore, all 
the Kings represent both success (for the king, after all, is 
supreme) and social responsibility. 

The King of Wands translates these qualities into Wands 
terms. He indicates a strong-minded person, able to dominate 
others by strength of will. His power derives from a firm belief 
in his own rightness. He knows the truth; he knows his method 
is best. He considers it only natural for others to follow him. 

At the same time he shows the Wands energy controlled 
and turned into useful projects, or long-term careers. The 
adventurous Wands nature can make such a person 
uncomfortable in this role. He leans forward on his throne, as 
if he would like to leap up and go to seek new experience. 

He is naturally honest, seeing no reason or value in lies. He 
is positive and optimistic for much the same reason; the 
Wands energy burns so strongly in him he does not under¬ 
stand why anyone would express negative attitudes. 

Such a strong personality can tend towards intolerance, 
unable to understand weakness or despair because he has not 
experienced these things himself. This impatient side of the 
King might bear the motto, ‘If 1 can do it you can’. Once, in a 
reading, I saw a very nice expression of what people used to 
call ‘the generation gap’: the King of Wands and the Fool, 
both of them energetic, yet one the essence of responsibility, 
the other the pure image of instinct and freedom. 

Two symbols dominate the card: the lion, emblem of Leo. 
and the salamander, a legendary lizard believed to inhabit 
fire. They represent the mundane and the spiritual, for while 
Leo indicates the personality traits belonging to Fire, the 
salamander was a favourite symbol of the alchemists. At his 
best the King is master of the creative Fire. His sense of social 
commitment has tamed it and put it to use. Notice that the 
salamanders on his robe are shown with their tails in their 
mouths. The closed circle means maturity and completion. 



WANDS 


29 


Compare this image with the Knight's shirt, where the tails 
and mouths do not meet. 

REVERSED 

When we reverse a card we alter in some way its prime 
meaning, as if the original impact had become blocked or 
rechannelled, or, in some cases, liberated. Some Tarot com¬ 
mentators prefer to discount reversed meanings, and it is true 
that in meditation or creativity we usually consider all cards 
as right side up. But in readings or study reversed meanings 
do more than double the possible meanings in the deck. By 
showing us the card from a different angle they give us a wider 
understanding of what the card really means. 

In a reading, if a court card refers to a specific person (by 
physical type, say, rather than the card’s qualities), then 
reversed indicates that person disturbed or blocked, or maybe 
having a bad influence on the subject. If, on the other hand, 
we look at the qualities in the card then reversed shows those 
qualities altered. 

Right side up the King shows us someone powerful and 
commanding, yet often intolerant of other people’s 
weaknesses. Reversed we see that natural fire after it has 
encountered obstacles and defeats that might make a less 
forceful person cynical or frightened. Because he is the King of 
Wands he does not lose his force but becomes instead 
tempered, more understanding of others and at the same time 
harsher in his attitude to life, which no longer appears such an 
easy contest. Waite's formula here is very apt: ‘Good but 
severe, austere yet tolerant’. 



30 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



iQUEENcfr WANDS. 


Figure 2 

QUEEN 

The Queen represents the yin, or receptive qualities of each 
element. She shows an appreciation of that element rather 
than the King’s social use of it. '1'his does not mean that the 
Queens indicate weakness, or even inaction, but rather the 
element translated into feeling and understanding. 

Once again, we need not apply these qualities only to 
women. If, in a reading, we see the Queen as identifying a 
person by physical type alone, then the Queen naturally 
means a woman. But if we wish to apply the symbolic 
qualities to someone, then any court card can signify a woman 
or a man. And apart from readings the Queen of Wands 
stands for a particular appreciation of life. 

In contrast with the King's eagerness and impatience, the 
Queen sits on her throne as if planted there. Her crown is 
flowering, her dress is sunshine. Alone of all the Queens she 
sits with her legs apart, signifying sexual energy. She shows a 
Fire appreciation of life, warm, passionate, very solidly in the 
world. Like the King, she is honest and sincere, seeing no 
purpose in deceit or nastiness. More sensitive than the King 
she allows herself to love both life and other people, seeing 
control or dominance as of no more value than cynicism. 

A black cat guards her throne. In Christian folklore the 
Devil gave a black cat to a witch to guard her from attack. The 



WANDS 


31 


meaning here is less melodramatic. Sometimes if a person 
loves life, the world appears to respond by protecting that 
person from harm and sending her or him joyous experiences. 
We cannot understand the way in which this happens without 
reaching the complex and inner knowledge of the universe 
symbolized by the last cards of the Major Arcana. Never¬ 
theless it can happen, and the black cat shows this response by 
nature to someone who approaches it with fiery joy. 

REVERSED 

As with the King the upside down Queen shows the reaction 
of such a person to opposition and sorrow. The basic good 
nature and positive attitudes of the Queen, as well as her 
energy, make her invaluable in a crisis or disaster. We can see 
her as the kind of person who will take over the running of 
someone's house when they have had a crisis and at the same 
time offer advice, consultation, emotional support, all these 
things coming from a natural impulse rather than any sense of 
duty. 

At the same time this good nature demands that life 
respond in a positive way. Too much disaster or too much 
opposition from life (and the weakness of such a person can be 
a tendency to think of life as ‘unfair’), and a nasty streak can 
emerge. She can become deceitful, jealous, unfaithful, or 
somewhat bitter. 



Figure 3 


32 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

KNIGHT 


The Knights translate the quality of each suit into movement. 
The energy we saw as accomplishment in the King, and 
awareness in the Queen, here bursts forth at an earlier stage. 
In the Knights we see the ways in which each element is put to 
use. At the same time, the Knights lack the sureness and 
stability of the Kings and Queens. 

Because Fire itself symbolizes movement, the Knight of 
Wands shows this quality in the extreme. In the words of some 
commentators he is ‘Fire of Fire' or Tire exalted'. He repre¬ 
sents eagerness, action, movement for its own sake, adventure 
and travel. Without some grounding influence all this excite¬ 
ment can dissipate itself as he tries to fly in every direction at 
once. Allied to a sense of purpose and aided by some Air-like 
influence of planning, the Knight of Wands can provide the 
energy and self-confidence for great achievement. 

Notice that on his shirt the salamanders' tails do not touch 
their mouths, symbolizing incomplete action, unformed plans. 
In contrast to the King, the Knight has only begun his 
adventures. 

REVERSED 

Picture the young Knight. Unlike the experienced warrior he 
seeks battle at every opportunity, needing to prove his courage 
and strength, to himself and to others. And yet he is easily 
thrown from his horse. Untried, all that Wands and Knight 
eagerness carries a certain fragile quality. Opposition confuses 
him, even brings his great projects crashing down around him. 
Expecting everything to fall before him, he may find himself in 
basic disharmony with people or situations around him. His 
actions are interrupted as he finds his basic good nature at 
odds with people and situations. In a reading, therefore, the 
reversed Knight symbolizes confusion, disrupted projects, 
breakdown, and disharmony. 



WANDS 


33 



Figure 4 

PAGE 

The Pages represent the quality of each suit in its simplest 
state, enjoying itself for itself in a lighter, more youthful, way 
than the mature Queen. Physically, Pages refer to children. In 
relation to adults they indicate a moment when a person 
experiences some aspect of life just for itself, free of external 
pressures. As children, the Pages very often symbolize 
beginnings, study, reflection, the qualities of the young 
student. 

Because Wands symbolize beginning, the Page of Wands 
especially indicates the start of projects, and in particular an 
announcement to the world, and to ourselves, that we are 
ready to begin either a ‘project’ (this can refer to a relation¬ 
ship as well as practical plans) or a new phase of life. On a 
simpler level the Page can represent a messenger, message or 
information. In emotional situations the Page’s simple 
eagerness implies a faithful friend or lover. 

REVERSED 

Quieter than the Knight, the Page is not thrown so wildly by 
problems but instead becomes confused and indecisive. His 
eagerness to start is disrupted by complexities and outright 
opposition, leaving him afraid or unable to declare himself. 
Because his basic qualities are simplicity and faithfulness 


34 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


(notice that many of the salamanders on his suit are complete, 
signifying not finished projects as with the King, but rather a 
simple wholeness in the self), when indecisive he can become 
unstable and weak. A person indicated by this card needs 
either to get away from complexity or to develop the maturity 
to deal with it. Continued indecision can only lead to the 
resolve and self-confidence degenerating further. 



Figure 5 

TEN 

Because they are so involved in movement and action the 
Wands invite problems. Constantly in conflict they almost 
attract enemies and difficulty. This comes partly from the lack 
of purpose and plan, but also from W’ands' secret enjoyment 
of any contest. 

The Ten shows us, on the surface, an image of a person 
burdened and oppressed by life, and especially by respon¬ 
sibility. His Wands eagerness has involved him in so many 
situations that now, paradoxically, that very energy is 
weighed down with commitments and problems. He wants to 
be free to travel, to seek adventure and new involvements; but 
instead he finds himself, like the suburban career man, caught 
in a net of endless responsibilities - financial, family, work - 
that he himself has created. He did not plan this; it has grown 
up around him. 



WANDS 


35 


We see here the great Wands problem. The Fire energy acts 
without thinking, takes on new problems simply for the 
challenge. But these situations and responsibilities do not go 
away when the person becomes bored and wants to go on to 
something new. They remain and can swamp the fire that 
seemed to conquer them. 

In emotional situations the card shows us the person who 
takes on himself or herself all the weight of a relationship. 
Whatever problems arise, conflicts and dissatisfaction, he or 
she tries to smooth them over. With bent back she or he 
struggles to keep the relationship going, while the other 
person(s) may not even recognize what is happening. 

In both the practical and the emotional situation the person 
has taken the burdens on her or himself. He or she has made 
the situation and needs to realize that other approaches are 
still possible. In such situations the burdens may not be 
wholly real, or at least may be avoided; they may in fact serve 
as an excuse to avoid doing anything really constructive such 
as breaking away from a bad situation. 

REVERSED 

Like many cards, especially when reversed, more than one 
meaning is possible. In a reading we can determine the best 
meaning (though sometimes more than one meaning will 
apply, as with a choice) partly through the other cards, and 
partly through an intuition that can only develop with 
practice. In study this variety of meanings demonstrates the 
fact that a situation can change in many ways. 

Most simply the Ten of Wands reversed indicates that the 
burdens have increased in weight and number to the point 
where the person may collapse from them, physically or 
emotionally. At the same time it can mean that the person has 
thrown off the burdens (perhaps because they have become 
too much to bear). From here the situation branches again. 
Does he or she throw down the sticks because of a realization 
that he or she can use the energy to better purpose? Or does 
the person only rebel against the responsibilities without 
really doing anything constructive? A woman I once read for 
described it as a question of throwing the sticks behind or 
before us. If behind, we attempt a new direction. If before, it 
means we will pick them up again and continue trudging on 
the same road. 



36 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 6 

NINE 

The Nines show how the suits deal with problems and the 
compromises they demand. Fire implies great strength, 
physical power, mental alertness. Emotionally, however, this 
predilection to fighting can trap Wands in patterns of 
conflicts. In the Nine we see again the image of someone who 
has faced a lot of opposition, from others and from life; rather 
than take it on himself, however, he has fought back. The act 
of fighting has developed his strength so that the picture shows 
someone muscular and keen-eyed. The Wands behind him 
can represent his resources in life, or else his problems 
looming up behind him. Either way, he is ready for the next 
fight. 

Notice, however, his rigid posture, the stiffness and the 
raised shoulder. Notice also the bandage around his head, 
indicating a psychic wound. The battler is not a whole person. 
Whether by necessity or habit he has closed off awareness of 
life beyond conflict, and now looks only for the next fight, 
while his eyes see only the enemy, sometimes even after the 
enemy has surrendered. 

REVERSED 

Again, alternatives. First, the defence fails. The obstacles and 
problems grow too great for his strength to hold them back. 



WANDS 


37 


The other meaning, however, is that of looking for some differ¬ 
ent approach. 

We should not assume the card always advises us to give up 
fighting. To abandon defensiveness means taking a great risk, 
for what happens if the problems we have kept at bay for so 
long rush up at us? Context is everything and sometimes the 
context demands those powerful shoulders and sharp eyes. 
And yet, observe how much energy the person uses up simply 
keeping himself tense and ready for battle. In specific readings 
the true implications of this card can only become clear 
through seeing it combine with other cards. 



Figure 7 

EIGHT 

Fire implies swiftness and movement. Though this movement 
sometimes lacks direction we see here the image of a journey 
reaching an end, or things completed. When the Fire finds its 
goal, the projects and situations come to a satisfactory end. 
The Wands have come to earth. Therefore, the image on this 
card implies the addition of Fentacles grounding to Wands 
energy. 

Romantically Waite calls them the ‘arrows of love’. We can 
see this especially as meaning action taken in a love affair, 
seduction, or proposals made and accepted. 




38 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


REVERSED 

Turned around the image becomes one of continuance, of 
nothing coming to an end, especially when an end is desired. 
A situation or attitude simply goes on and on, with no conclu¬ 
sion in sight. If such a situation cannot be avoided, then it is 
good to recognize it and accept it, rather than let it bring 
frustration or disappointment. On the other hand, sometimes 
we ourselves can bring about this up-in-the-air quality by 
expecting a situation to remain unresolved. One of the most 
important positions in a reading is that called Topes and 
fears’; very often it turns out to be a self-fulfilling prophecy. 

The arrows of love, when reversed, become arrows of 
jealousy and argument. The jealousy may derive from uncer¬ 
tainty and confusion, both in our feelings and in those of the 
other person. 



Figure 8 

SEVEN 

Like the Nine, this is a card of conflict, but here we see the 
battle itself, and the effect is exhilarating. With their natural 
strength and positiveness Wands expect to win and usually 
do. Through active conflict the figure in this card rises above 
any depression into the clear intoxicating air. In a way this 
card shows a background to the Nine. We become defensive 
and committed to fighting through an earlier experience of 


WANDS 


39 


winning, staying on top. While the fight goes on we enjoy it. 
People under Wands’ influence need to know they are alive, 
they need that charge of adrenalin to show them that the Fire 
still runs through them. Only later does the habit of constant 
battle close them in. 

REVERSED 

As implied in the picture the person is using the excitement of 
conflict to rise above uncertainty and depression. Reversed 
indicates sinking into anxiety, indecision, embarrassment. 
Right side up he was not so much in control of his life as 
staying on top of it. Here he can no longer put off the con¬ 
tradictions. Above all, the card warns against indecision, 
suggesting that if a person can come to a clear course of action 
the natural Wands self-confidence will return to overcome the 
anxieties and outer problems. 



Figure 9 

SIX 

As the Wands progress down to the Ace they become stronger. 
The emphasis shifts from problems to joy, from defensiveness 
to optimism until, with the Ace, we become unified with the 
life-giving Fire. The Six marks a turning point. In the Golden 
Dawn system the card bears the title ‘Victory', and we see, in 
fact, a victory parade, the hero crowned with a wreath and 



40 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


surrounded by his followers. However, he has not yet reached 
his destination. (A fiction, of course; he could just as easily be 
coming home. I am following Waite’s lead on this.) He is 
assuming victory. Optimism produces the very success it 
desires and expects. 

Often, though certainly not always, it requires only a true 
belief in ourselves to find the energy to accomplish what we 
want. More, such belief will inspire others to follow us. Sixes 
deal with communication and gifts. Here it is the Fire belief in 
life that Wands give to the people around them. 

REVERSED 

True optimism creates victory. False optimism, covering our 
doubts with bluster or illusion, leads to fear and weakness. 
The attitude shown in the card right side up cannot be faked, 
for when it does not work it becomes the opposite: defeatism, a 
sense that enemies will overwhelm us, or that life or specific 
people will betray us in some way. This attitude too often 
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy, for suspicion can produce 
betrayal. 



Figure 10 

FIVE 


Again conflict, but on a lighter level. It is in the nature of 
Wands to see life as battle, but in its best sense battle becomes 



WANDS 


41 


an exciting struggle, eagerly sought after. The Fives in general 
show some difficulty or loss, but the element of Fire translates 
problems into competition, seen as a way in which people 
communicate with society and with each other. The young 
people are fighting, but not to hurt each other. Like children 
playing knights they bang their sticks together without really 
hitting anyone. They seek not to destroy but only to compete 
for the sheer joy of action. 

REVERSED 

The exciting competition right side up implies a sense of rules 
and fair play, for without understood agreements struggle as a 
game becomes impossible. Reversed, the card indicates that 
the rules are being abandoned, that in fact the battle has taken 
on a more serious, a nastier tone. The sense of play changes to 
bitterness or disillusionment as people seek actually to hurt or 
ruin each other. The Fire attitude to life, especially when not 
extended by Swords awareness and wisdom, demands that life 
respond in a positive way and not show its crueller side. The 
Five reversed brings to mind again that phrase 'the fire has 
gone out’. 



(a) Figure 11 {h) 

FOUR 


The number four, with its image of the square, implies stasis 




42 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


or solidity. The irrepressible Wands energy, however, requires 
no protective fences as does, say, Pentacles. It will not be con¬ 
tained, and so we see people marching out ecstatically to the 
simplest of structures, trusting in the sun to burn off any 
clouds of trouble. The card represents a domestic environment 
filled with Fire optimism, eagerness, and celebration. As in 
the Six we see people following the dancers. Unlike that card, 
however, where the soldiers followed the charismatic leader, 
the people here are swept along by joy. 

They are leaving a walled city for the open bower. In other 
words, their spirit and courage carry them from a defensive 
situation to an open one. We can contrast this image with that 
of the Tower, shown on the right. The two figures in that 
Major card are dressed very similarly (even to blue and ied 
robes) to the two in the Four of W'ands. In its less esoteric 
meanings the lower shows the explosion that results when 
people allow a repressive or miserable situation to build up to 
an intolerable level. In the Four of Wands optimism and love 
of freedom carry the people, together, out of their walled city 
before it becomes a Tower-like prison. 

REVERSED 

Waite calls this card unchanged upside down. The joy is so 
powerful it cannot be blocked. We can add, however, that the 
reversed Four might indicate, like the Sun in the Major 
Arcana, that the happiness in the environment is not so 
obvious. As with the family in the Ten of Pentacles, the people 
symbolized here may need to learn to appreciate what they 
have. Another possibility: the happiness in the person’s 
environment is just as strong, but unorthodox, at least in 
terms of other people’s attitudes and expectations. 



WANDS 


43 


in 



Figure 12 

THREE 

The number three, because it joins one and two in a new 
reality (see the Empress in the Major Arcana) indicates com¬ 
binations and achievements. In each suit it shows that element 
in its maturity. With Wands this becomes accomplishment. 
The figure is shown strong, but at rest, unthreatened. The 
young competitors of Five have achieved success, especially in 
business, career, etc., though the card implies emotional 
maturity as well. The Wands eagerness does not vanish, but 
here he sends his ships out to explore new areas while he 
himself stays behind. In contrast to the Knight the image 
suggests keeping a solid basis in what we have already 
accomplished while we continue to open new areas and 
interests in ourselves. Sometimes in readings this can mean 
maintaining a primary commitment to existing relationships 
while still looking for new friends or lovers. 

Some Tarot cards acquire special meanings that apply only 
to specific situations. For a person troubled or struggling with 
the past the Three of Wands can indicate becoming at peace 
with his or her memories. They become like boats sailing past 
on a wide river and then out to sea. The setting sun, a symbol 
of contentment, lights up the river, symbol of a person's 
emotional life, with a warm golden light. 

In the Three of Wands we see the first of the Gate cards (the 




44 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


suit of Wands, with its emphasis on action, contains fewer of 
these inner cards than any of the other suits). Metaphysically 
the sea has always evoked in people a sense of the vast ness and 
mystery of the universe, while rivers symbolize the experience 
of the ego dissolving into that great Sea. The boats represent 
that part of us which explores deep experience, while the man 
expresses the importance of rooting ourselves in ordinary 
reality before we attempt such metaphysical journeys. This 
schematic explanation gives only an intellectual shadow of the 
card’s true meanings. 'That meaning lies in the experience of 
merging with the picture until the boats carry us into the 
unknown areas of the self. Significantly it is the addition of 
Water and Earth in the form of the sea and the rock which 
direct the images to Fire's greatest potential. Nevertheless, the 
special quality of this Gate, that of exploring the unknown, 
belongs to Fire. 

REVERSED 

Several meanings reflect the complex nature of the card right 
side up. On the one hand it can mean the failure of some 
‘exploration' or project (either practical or emotional) due to 
‘storms’, that is, problems greater than we had hoped for or 
expected. But it can also mean becoming involved in our 
environment after a time of detachment and reflection. The 
image right side up carries a certain isolation as he looks down 
at the world. Finally, it can indicate being disturbed by 
memories. 



WANDS 


45 



Figure 13 

TWO 

Again a card of success, even greater than the Three, for here 
a man stands in a castle and holds the world in his hands. Yet 
the card does not carry the same contentment as the Three. 
He is bored; his accomplishments have only served to wall 
him in (a situation very unpleasant to Fire), and the world he 
holds is a very small one. Waite compares his weariness to 
that of Alexander, who supposedly wept after he had con¬ 
quered the known world because he then could think of 
nothing else to do with his life (his death shortly afterwards no 
doubt gave this legend an extra boost). 

W'aite's comment suggests that the Wands love of battle 
and challenge can leave one with no real satisfaction in actual 
accomplishments when the fight has been won. Comparison 
with the Four (as well as the Ten) is obvious. There several 
people dance together, out from a walled city. Here one 
person stands alone, walled in by his own success. 

REVERSED 

Here we find one of Waite’s best formulas: ‘Surprise, wonder, 
enchantment, trouble, and fear’. All these terms together 
describe someone jumping directly into new experience. 
When we leave behind safe situations and past success to enter 
the unknown, we liberate so much emotion and energy that 



46 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


we cannot avoid either the wonder and enchantment or the 
fear that goes with it. The card speaks very strongly to people 
who have lived for a long time in some unpleasant or 
unsatisfying situation, and finally decide to make a change all 
at once. 



I ACE .y WANDS 


Figure 14 

ACE 


A gift of strength, of power, of great sexual energy, of the love 
of living. The leaves burst out so abundantly that they fall off 
to become yods, the first letter of God’s name. The yods’ 
presence in all the Aces but that of Pentacles indicates that we 
receive these primal experiences as a gift from life. We cannot 
cause or produce them by any normal means; they come to us 
as hands emerging from clouds. Only by reaching the high 
states of awareness shown in the later cards of the Major 
Arcana can we understand the sources of these bursts of ele¬ 
mental energy. In ordinary situations it is enough to 
experience and appreciate them. 

At the beginning of some situation, no card could signal a 
better start. It gives eagerness and strength. At the same time, 
the card teaches humility, for it reminds us that ultimately we 
have done nothing morally to deserve the optimism and 
greater energy that sometimes allows us to overwhelm other 
people. 


WANDS 


47 


REVERSED 

A reversed Ace implies in some way a failure of that primal 
experience. This can mean simply that the situation turns 
against us, or, especially with Wands and Swords, that we 
find it impossible to hang on to that force and use it 
beneficially. Therefore, the Ace of Wands reversed can mean 
chaos, things falling apart, either because it just happened 
that way, or because we have ruined them through too much 
undirected energy. This can happen on a practical level, 
through too much activity, too many new starts without con¬ 
solidating past gains; or emotionally, through being over¬ 
confident of friendship, or simply overbearing; or finally, 
sexually, through refusing to contain that fiery sexual 
appetite. 

Waite included a much lighter reading for the reversed Ace: 
‘Clouded joy’. Then the Ace becomes like the Four or the Sun; 
the wonder and happiness exists even when we cannot, or will 
not, see it in front of us. 



Chapter 2. 

Cups 



If Fire symbolizes the spirit force giving life to the universe, 
then Water signifies the love that allows the soul to receive 
that force. The sun draws the seed out of the ground, but only 
when water has first softened and nurtured it. Fire represents 
action, Water formlessness or passivity. Water does not sym¬ 
bolize weakness; rather it stands for the inner being, and that 
slow coming to life of the seed. In extreme situations water 
and fire are natural enemies; a flood will obliterate a fire, 
while a flame under a container will dissolve the already 
shapeless water into steam. At the same time life cannot exist 
or grow without a blending of these two primal opposites. 

This paradox has led the alchemists and others to describe 
transformation - which is not simply change, but sudden 




CUPS 


49 


evolution from a fragmented to an integrated state - as a 
unifying of Fire and Water, shown in the image of the her¬ 
maphrodite (in traditional society, with its strict identification 
of gender and role, what more powerful symbol of opposites 
existed than man and woman’), and more symbolically in the 
six-pointed star. In that ancient image (far older than its 
modern use as an emblem of Jewishness) the upward pointing 
Fire triangle joins the downward Water triangle to form a 
picture of life reaching out in all directions from a unified 
centre. 

Because the water in a river changes constantly, yet the 
river always retains its basic character, rivers symbolize the 
true self that remains constant beneath all the outer changes 
in a person’s life. Thus, while Fire symbolizes what we do, 
Water stands for what we are. 

All rivers flow into the sea. However much our egos insist 
upon our separation from the rest of life, our instincts - the 
YVater side of us - remind us of our harmonv with the 
universe. Western culture has emphasized the idea of the 
individual as unique and separated from the world. The Tarot 
does not deny the individual’s uniqueness - it insists on it, 
through the uniqueness of readings - but instead describes the 
individual as a combination of elements (an astrology chart, 
with its twelve signs and twelve houses, teaches the same 
lesson). And one of those elements remains a person's basic- 
connection to the rest of life. 

The suit of Cups shows an inner experience that flows 
rather than defines, that opens rather than restricts. Cups 
represent love and imagination, joy and peace, a sense of 
harmony and wonder. They show us love as the Way to Spirit, 
both the love we give to others and the love we receive from 
people and from life itself in its happier moments. 

At times when life demands action, either physical or 
emotional, Cups represent the problem of passivity. All 
attempts to do anything, or to sort through some complicated 
problem, dissolve into vagueness, apathy, or empty dreams. 
Wands energize Cups, Swords define that emotional energy 
and give it direction, help it to figure things out (though an Air- 
storm will agitate the peaceful Water), while Pentacles bring 
the fantasies back to the ground of real projects. 



50 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 15 

KING 

Like the Kings of Wands, he represents his suit in terms of 
social responsibility, accomplishments and maturity. And like 
the Fire King, his position as ‘maintainer of society' does not 
fit him all that comfortably. Cups symbolize the creative 
imagination, and to achieve success he has had to discipline 
and even suppress his dreams. The fish, symbol of creativity, 
hangs around his neck, but as an artificial ornament, fie has 
directed his creative powers into socially responsible achieve¬ 
ments. Waite describes him as a man of ‘business, law, 
divinity’. In a sense he has matured his suit; but Water 
demands to flow, not to be confined. 

Behind his throne a live fish jumps through the waves, 
signifying that creative imagination remains alive even when 
pushed to the background. Similarly, his throne floats on the 
lively sea, yet he himself does not touch the water (compare 
the Queen, p.52), indicating that his achievement derives 
ultimately from creativity, though he has shaped his life in 
such a way as to separate him from his own playful poet-like 
imagination. 

In its extreme the imagery suggests someone who has 
dammed up his or her emotions and imagination. It also 
shows, more gently, a person who expresses these qualities, 
but not as central to her or his life. Responsibility comes 
before self-expression. 


CUPS 


51 


The King does not look at his cup; rather he holds it in the 
same way he holds his sceptre, symbol of power. Some com¬ 
mentators see the King as a person of troubled emotions, even 
anger and violence, who habitually suppresses these feelings 
even from himself, always maintaining a calm exterior. This 
interpretation derives from the idea that Kings stand for Air 
and therefore the King of Cups is Air of Water, the troubled 
emotions of Air covered by the benign influence of Water. 

In some contexts, especially the arts, the King takes on a 
very different meaning. Because he is the leader of his suit, he 
can symbolize success, achievement, mastery, and maturity in 
artistic work. 

REVERSED 

More complex, and perhaps more troubled than the King of 
W'ands, the King of Cups reversed slides towards dishonesty. 
When right side up he uses his creativity for his work; 
reversed, he turns his talents to vice or corruption. Swindlers 
also use creativity to further their careers, but we would not 
describe them as ‘responsible’. 

The card upside down can mean that the violent Air 
emotions emerge from their calm exterior, perhaps through 
the pressure of outside events. Romantically, the King of Cups 
reversed can suggest a dishonest yet domineering lover, more 
often male, sometimes female. 

Finally, in relation to the arts, the King reversed can 
suggest that an artist’s achievement has proved to be 
insignificant, or that a person has not yet matured and cannot 
point to a significant body of work. In a reading, this final 
meaning would come out strongly if the card appeared in con¬ 
nection with certain Pentacles reversed, such as the Eight, or 
the Three. 



52 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 1C) 

QUEEN 

The most successful and balanced of the Cups, in some ways 
of all the Minor cards, the Queen is almost a mundane version 
of the World Dancer. Coming between the outer responsibility 
of the King and the passiveness of the Knight, she shows the 
possibility of blending imagination and action, creativity and 
social usefulness. Her throne, decorated with cherubic 
mermaids, sits on land, indicating her vital connection to the 
outer world and to other people, a connection more real than 
the King’s. At the same time the water Mows over her feet and 
merges with her dress, signifying the unity of self with emotion 
and imagination. The water suggests also unconscious forces - 
the underlying spiritual patterns shown in the Major Arcana - 
nourishing conscious life. The unity of water, land, and the 
Queen implies that we do not feed the imagination by giving it 
complete freedom to wander where it will, but rather by 
directing it into valuable activity, an idea that most artists 
would endorse. This idea appears even more strongly in the 
Nine of Pentacles, emblem of creative discipline. 

Waite describes the cup she holds as her own creation. It is 
the most elaborate of the Cups (whatever we may think about 
its style!) and symbolizes the achievement brought about 
through using the imagination. Notice its church-like shape. 
Until the modern age (and still in more archaic cultures) all 


CUPS 


53 


art expressed and glorified spiritual experience. 1'he Queen 
stares at the cup intently, showing the strong will that directs 
and moulds creative force without suppressing it. At the same 
time her look suggests that the creative person derives inspira¬ 
tion for future activity from her or his past achievements. 
Compare her fierce gaze with the dreaminess of the Knight, or 
the cloudy fantasies of the Seven. 

Will power alone will not unite imagination and action. 
Only love can give meaning to her actions, and realize her 
goals. These goals are not simply creative in the narrow sense 
of art, but in the wider sense of making something whole and 
alive out of the opportunities and elements given by life. They 
can include emotional goals, especially family, for while the 
King symbolizes society, the Queen symbolizes the family, for 
men as well as women. 

What is most important is that she joins consciousness to 
feeling. She knows what she wants and will take the steps 
necessary to get it. Yet she acts always with an awareness of 
love. 

Waite says ‘loving intelligence and hence the gift of vision’, 
terms suggesting that a vision of life as joyful can only come as 
a gift, but love can open us to receiving such a gift, to recogniz¬ 
ing that it exists. With intelligence joined to love we return the 
gift by taking that vision and making something real and 
lasting from it. 

REVERSED 

Reversing the Queen of Cups breaks that unity of vision and 
action. We see someone ambitious and powerful, yet 
dangerous, because she cannot be trusted. The love has 
become lost, and with it the commitment to values greater 
than her own success. If she slides further from the balance, 
she can become dishonourable, even depraved, as her creative 
force lurches out of control. 


54 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



(a) Figure 17 ( b) 

KNIGHT 

As a less developed figure than the Queen or King, he has not 
learned to direct his imagination into the world. Therefore 
dreams dominate this card, with its images of a slow horse, 
and a knight lost in the enticements of his cup, symbol of the 
imagination. At the same time the creative force is less 
powerful here than in any of the other Cups court cards. Only 
a narrow river flows through a parched land. The Knight has 
not learned that the true imagination feeds on action rather 
than fantasy. By this I mean that if we do nothing with our 
dreams they remain vague and unrelated to the rest of our 
lives. 

VVe may make another point about the Knight's dreami¬ 
ness. What feeds it - inner principles, as in myth or archetypal 
art; or self-indulgence, as in daydreams and escapist films or 
books? The English poet, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 
distinguished between 'imagination' and ‘fancy'. Both take 
the mind away from ordinary experience and perceptions. 
However, while the first derives from and leads to an 
awareness of underlying spiritual truth, the second produces 
only fantasies that may excite, but ultimately lack real 
meaning. They derive from the ego rather than the uncon¬ 
scious. 

Nothing emerges from his cup (compare the Page; p.56). 





CUPS 


55 


Nor has he shaped it into something greater than it was, as 
has the Queen. A Knight is a figure committed to action and 
involvement. Water, on the other hand, symbolizes passive¬ 
ness. The symbolism - Fire of Water in the Golden Dawn 
system - indicates the elements as unreconciled. By denying 
this basic commitment to the world, he does not allow his 
imagination to produce anything. 

Because he is a Knight the outside world of action, of sex, 
may pull him even while he pursues his thoughts and fan¬ 
tasies. His passiveness can sometimes be a pose, almost 
exaggerated for the purpose of denying those temptations and 
desires which disturb his peace. Romantically the Knight can 
represent a lover who does not wish to commit him or herself, 
who is perhaps attractive yet passive, withdrawn, or 
narcissistic. 

These harsh images of the Knight all deal with his conflicts. 
At the same time his helmet and feet are winged, his horse is 
spirited in its slowness. And he resembles Death, symbol of 
transformation. If the Knight is not pulled by responsibility or 
desire, if he follows a genuine vision rather than escape from 
outside commitments, then he can go very deeply into himself, 
turning the Knight energy into an exploration of his own inner 
world. 

REVERSED 

In various ways we see the Knight reacting towards increased 
demands from the world beyond himself. It can mean simply 
that he rouses himself to action or else follows his more 
physical desires. Or it can mean that a passive person is being 
pushed towards action or commitment and does not like it. 
Without outwardly resisting he or she can resent those 
demands. The result can be a wall built up between the 
Knight and those people who are making him act out his 
responsibilities. This attitude can result in hypocrisy or 
manipulation, sometimes lies and tricks. 



56 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure AY 

PAGE 

Being younger in spirit, child-like, the Page does not suffer the 
same conflict with either responsibility or sensual desire. He 
indicates a state or a time in which contemplation and fantasy 
are very proper to a person. No outside demands disturb his or 
her gentle contemplation. As a result the fish of imagination 
looks at him from his cup. Amused, he looks back at it without 
the Knight’s need to penetrate so deeply into himself. Here, 
the imagination is its own justification. 

The fish can also symbolize psychic talents and sensitivity. 
And since the Pages all have a student quality, the Page of 
Cups can show someone developing psychic abilities, either 
through an actual programme of study and/or meditation, or 
else such talents developing by themselves, but in a peaceful 
way. 

REVERSED 

Right side up we saw a person letting his imagination bubble 
up before him. Because he does nothing with his fantasies they 
give him no trouble. If he acts upon them, however, they may 
lead him into mistakes. Reversed therefore means to follow 
our inclinations, to act without thinking, or to allow our 
immediate desires to seduce us, particularly if they go against 
our common sense. VVe see the reversed Page whenever we 




CUPS 


57 


buy something we do not need and do not even really want; 
we see him when we make promises we cannot keep or com¬ 
mitments that do not really mean anything. 

In other situations, if the Page refers to psychic develop¬ 
ment, or true visions, then reversed shows a person disturbed 
by these visions. For many people in our rationalized world 
the sudden emergence of psychic talent, even if deliberately 
sought through training, can appear very frightening. The 
reversed Page mirrors the fear and reminds us to calm down, 
to look peacefully at the fish rising from the cup of ourselves. 
In connection with Pentacles it calls for grounding in outer 
reality to avoid being washed away by fantasies or visions. 



Figure 19 

TEN 

As the highest number, the Tens signify being filled with the 
quality of the suit. In Wands we saw an excess of burdens; in 
Cups we find joy and the wonder of life spread across the sky. 
The holy Grail, symbol of God's grace and love, rests at the 
base of this suit, showing us that love, imagination, and joy all 
come to us as gifts. The Bible tells us that God made the 
rainbow as a promise that the world will never again suffer a 
Hood of destruction. But the rainbow carries a more positive 
promise as well - that life brings happiness and not just an 
absence of pain. 




58 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


The man and woman in the picture understand these 
things. Arm in arm they look up and celebrate the rainbow. 
The children, however, dance without looking up. They sym¬ 
bolize innocence, which takes happiness as the natural condi¬ 
tion of life. They expect happiness, but do not waste it. 
Showing a family, the card refers primarily to domestic 
happiness, but can indicate any situation that brings a surge 
of joy. It especially refers to the recognition of the valuable 
qualities in a situation. This meaning pertains especially in 
readings where the Ten of Cups appears in contrast to the Ten 
of Pentacles. 

REVERSED 

There are two basic variants here. First, all the emotion 
turns against itself. Some highly-charged situation, usually 
romantic or domestic, has gone wrong, producing violent 
feeling, anger, or deceit. Or, in practice, the reversed Ten can 
simply mean that a person does not recognize or appreciate 
the happiness life is offering him or her. 



Figure 20 

NINE 


From deep joy we move to the simpler pleasures of feasting 
and physical contentment. As noted earlier, the Nines depict 
the compromises we make with life. Wands showed a strong 






CUPS 


59 


defence; the more benign Cups demonstrate the attitude of 
avoiding worry and problems by concentrating on ordinary 
pleasures. People sometimes react antagonistically to this 
card, perhaps wishing to see themselves as beyond super¬ 
ficiality. At times, especially after troubles or a period of long, 
hard work, nothing can serve us better than a simple good 
time. 

REVERSED 

For once the reversed meaning gives the greater awareness - 
to use Waite’s formula, ‘truth, loyalty, liberty'. In connection 
with the right side up meaning, the words imply a rejection of 
surface values; but they also refer to very tangled or oppressive 
situations where, by clinging to the thread of truth, or by 
staying loyal to ourselves, or to others, or to a purpose, we can 
bring about victory and liberation. 




(a) Figure 21 (b) 

EIGHT 


The pleasant nature of Cups tends to lull us away from what 
we have to do. The Eight begins (or ends) a series of five cards 
dealing with the Water problem of action. In this card we see 
someone turning his back on a double row of standing Cups 
which symbolize a situation that not only has provided 
happiness, but actually continues to do so. In contrast to the 




60 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Five, all the Cups remain upright; nothing has been knocked 
over. And yet the person knows that the time has come to 
leave. The imagery suggests one of the true uses of Water 
instinct - an ability to sense when something has ended before 
it either dries up or comes crashing down around us, to know 
the time to move on. 

We see the figure climbing a hill, going to higher ground, 
with the implication of moving from a less to a more meaning¬ 
ful situation. Notice the resemblance of the figure to the 
Hermit beside him. To reach the height of the Hermit's 
wisdom, we must first put the ordinary things of life behind 
us. 

The Hermit reminds us that the image of land does not 
necessarily mean action or involvement in the ordinary sense, 
but can suggest almost the opposite: that is, withdrawing from 
outer activity to seek a greater self-awareness. At first the 
scene appears to take place at night; but when we look closer 
we see that actually it depicts an eclipse, with the moon 
moving across the sun. A moon phase, that is, a period of 
inner awareness, has taken over from outer-directed activity. 
By joining moon imagery to a scene of movement, the card 
teaches us that developing a deeper sense of self is also an 
action. Remember that the Hermit, by reversing the sexual 
polarity of the High Priestess above him, combines action and 
intuition in a definite programme of self-knowledge. 

Whether we view the figure as moving away from the world, 
or into action, the card symbolizes leaving a stable situation. 
In its deepest level this card acts as a Gate, similar in certain 
ways to the Three of Wands. Both work through the image of 
a journey into the unknown, but while the Fire card is drawn 
to Water, the Water card is drawn to Air. The Three of 
Wands breaks down the ego and frees the exploring spirit, 
while the Eight of Cups moves from the vagueness of Water to 
the specific knowledge of abstract principles symbolized by 
the climb up the Hermit’s mountain. 

REVERSED 

Sometimes the upside down Eight indicates the simple nega¬ 
tion of the card's basic image - a refusal to leave some situa¬ 
tion, a determination to hang on even when we know deep 
inside that we have taken all we can from it. Such a descrip¬ 
tion characterizes many relationships. 



CUPS 


61 


Usually, however, the card reversed maintains its quality of 
awareness and correct response. It symbolizes that the time to 
leave has not come, that the situation will continue to give joy 
and meaning. 

One final possibility: timidity, leaving a situation because a 
person lacks the courage to pursue it and take everything she 
or he can get from it. Many people make this a pattern in their 
lives; they become involved in relationships, work, projects, 
etc., and then run away, either when difficulties arise, or when 
the time comes for genuine commitment. 



Figure 22 

SEVEN 

With the Seven, the Cups problem emerges in its most direct 
form. Emotion and imagination can produce wonderful 
visions, but without a grounding in both action and the outer 
realities of life these fantastic images remain daydreams, 
‘fancies’ without real meaning or value. Notice that the visions 
cover the whole range of fantasies from wealth (the jewels), to 
a victory wreath, to fear (the dragon), to adventure (the 
castle), even the archetypes of mythology — a godlike face, a 
mysterious radiant figure, and a snake, universal symbol of 
psychic wisdom. It is a mistake to think that daydreams are 
meaningless because of their content; on the contrary they often 
spring from deep archetypal needs and images. They lack 



62 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


meaning because they do not connect to anything outside 
themselves. 

REVERSED 

This card reversed means a determination to make something 
from dreams. This does not mean rejecting fantasies, but 
rather doing something with them. 



Figure 23 

SIX 

As cards of benevolent emotion and dreams the Cups signify 
sweet memories. Sometimes these memories truly represent 
the past; at other times we may idealize the past and see it 
through a haze of security and happiness. The emblem of this 
second attitude is childhood, pictured as a safe time, when 
parents, or older brothers and sisters, protected us and gave us 
everything we needed. Sometimes such an attitude can 
produce a warm secure feeling which will help people face 
their current problems. In this sense the card shows the past 
(the dwarf) giving a gift of memories to the future, symbolized 
by the child. At other times, however, a fixation on the past 
can prevent a person from facing current problems. The past 
can distract from the present just as much as fantasies of the 
future. 

There are other meanings for the Six beside memory. The 



CUPS 


63 


Sixes show relationships of giving and receiving. Here we see 
the image of a teacher or protector giving wisdom and security 
to someone who might be a family member, a student, or a 
friend. 

REVERSED 

Like the Seven, the Six reversed indicates a move towards 
action. Specifically, it shows looking towards the future, 
rather than the past. The two cards reversed are very similar; 
the difference is that the Six shows an attitude while the Seven 
indicates actual steps taken. 

At other times, depending on the right side up meaning, the 
Six reversed indicates disturbed memories (compare the 
Three of Wands reversed), or a feeling of alienation from the 
past. It can also show' the breakdown of a relationship based 
on one person protecting or teaching the other(s). 



Figure 24 

FIVE 

The Fives concern struggle and sometimes pain. With Wands 
we saw the adventure of competition; Cups show the 
emotional reaction to loss. The picture depicts sorrow but also 
acceptance. Three cups lie spilled out, but two remain 
standing, even if at the moment the figure concentrates on the 
three. In readings I have often seen this card linked to either 




64 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


the Three of Cups as a happiness or hope that has failed, or 
else the Three of Swords; the two cups standing have often 
referred to the Two of Cups, that is, support from a lover or 
friend. 

The w'oman (or man; the androgynous character of the 
figure indicates that sorrow unites the sexes) stands rigid, 
wrapped in black, the colour of grief. She needs to accept that 
some happiness has suddenly vanished, been knocked over. 
She does not yet realize that something remains, for first she 
must understand and accept the loss. Has she herself knocked 
over the cups, either through recklessness or by taking them 
for granted? In the sense of awareness the card relates to 
Justice, emblem of truth and the acceptance of responsibility. 
In her pose and costume she resembles the Hermit, who 
cloaks himself in wisdom to hold him upright in his task of 
looking within for a vision of his life, the vision he will accept 
injustice. 

The river represents the flow of sorrow but the bridge sym¬ 
bolizes consciousness and determination. It leads from the 
past (loss) to the future (new beginnings). When she has 
accepted her loss she can then turn, pick up the two remaining 
cups, and cross over the bridge to the house, symbol of 
stability and continuity. 

With its deep evocation of regret the card forms another 
Gate, bringing to us that sense of spiritual loss and separation 
which all over the world has given rise to myths of a fall or an 
exile from Paradise. 

REVERSED 

The basic meaning of the card can change in three ways when 
reversed. First, it can mean not accepting the loss, and as an 
extension of this, false projects or mistakes. Second, it can 
indicate support from others, friendship, new interests and 
occupations after some sad or disturbing event. Finally, it can 
emphasize an awareness of what remains important and per¬ 
manent in the face of sorrow. In this sense the woman turns 
from the three to the two. Here the two cups symbolize the 
solid basis of a person’s life; they remain standing because 
they are not so easily knocked over. And this awareness 
indicates that the three fallen cups symbolize something less 
important than might at first seem at the time of its destruc¬ 
tion. 



CUPS 


65 



Figure 25 

FOUR 

The passiveness of Cups can sometimes lead to apathy. What 
we can call the ‘negative imagination' makes us look at every¬ 
thing as worthless or boring. There seems to be nothing worth 
getting up for, nothing worth doing, and nothing worth 
examining. 

The three cups symbolize the person’s past experience. 
Bored by what life has given him he does not recognize the 
new opportunities being offered to him by the fourth cup. The 
resemblance of that cup to the Ace suggests that the new 
possibilities can lead to happiness and satisfaction. In the 
main, however, the card shows a situation when everything in 
life has come to appear the same. The card sometimes shows 
apathy resulting from a dull, unstimulating environment. 

REVERSED 

Again, the reversal takes us out of ourselves and awakens us to 
the world and its possibilities. New things are offered, new 
relations, new ideas. Most important, the reversed card shows 
enthusiasm and the seizing of opportunities. 




66 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 26 

THREE 

The Threes show an appreciation of the meaning and value of 
the suit. Because of the Grail at the base of the suit, the Three 
of Cups indicates joy, celebration, and above all sharing the 
wonder of life. As if we had passed the crisis of action, the final 
three cards all, according to their numbers, flow with 
happiness. Here we see the women celebrating, as at a 
harvest. Either a crisis has finished, or work has produced 
good results. 

We see the three women so intertwined we can hardly tell 
whose arm is whose. In bad times as well as good, the card 
shows a sharing of experience. 

REVERSED 

Again several meanings present themselves. First of all it can 
show the loss of some happiness. Very often it indicates that 
something hoped for has not come about. It can also signify 
the failure of friendship, and again the disillusionment of 
finding that friends have not supported us when we needed 
them, or else the break up of a group of friends. 

Another meaning shows a corruption of the original. Rather 
than a shared celebration of life’s joys we find what Waite 
quaintly calls ‘excess in physical enjoyment and the pleasures 
of the senses’. Obviously Waite intended this to mean that 



CUPS 


67 


deeper values are ignored. It is worth observing, however, that 
most people find this phrase, especially as a prediction, not at 
all unpleasant. 




(a) (b) (c) 

Figure 27 

TWO 

In many ways this card acts as a lesser version of the Lovers. 
While the trump shows the great power of mature sexual 
relationships the Minor card emphasizes the beginning of a 
relationship. This is not a hard and fast rule as far as readings 
are concerned. The Two can often show a long-term union or 
friendship, perhaps on a lighter level than the Lovers. In 
study, and most commonly in practice, however, it indicates 
the pledging of friendship, the beginning of a love affair. 


68 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


In the trump we see the Angel, symbol of super-con¬ 
sciousness. In the Two of Cups we see the winged lion over the 
caduceus of Hermes, symbol of healing and wisdom. In both 
cases, the card shows how two people by uniting their 
separate qualities and abilities through love, produce some¬ 
thing in their lives beyond what either would have achieved 
alone. The lion symbolizes sexuality, the wings Spirit. Love 
gives a greater meaning to the sexual drive that leads us to it. 

In Part One of this book we saw how the Lovers can serve as 
a diagram of the unified self. We can look at the Two of Cups 
in a similar way. While the man symbolizes action and 
movement, the woman symbolizes emotion, sensitivity, and an 
appreciation of experience. By uniting these two qualities we 
give our lives value. 

Notice the resemblance of the man to the Fool. In a reading 
these two cards came up linked together. The woman, an 
artist, wanted to know what direction her work should take. 
She was especially concerned to investigate whether her art 
came from a real centre in her life or was simply an 
intellectual exercise. Now, other cards indicated she had 
reached a level of technical mastery in what she had been 
doing, while the Fool, as an outcome, showed her taking a 
leap into a new area. But the Two of Cups showed she would 
find success if she linked her technical ability and explorations 
to the spiritual grounding symbolized by the woman. 

REVERSED 

In different ways the reversed card shows a breakdown of the 
ideals symbolized right side up. It can mean a love affair or 
friendship which has gone sour in some way, in particular 
because of jealousy and a breakdown of trust. It can mean 
simply the end of a relationship. Depending on the cards 
around it, it can signify a relationship endangered by internal 
or external pressures. Another possibility is infatuation, when 
people pretend to others, to themselves, that a love affair 
means more than it actually does. In a similar vein the 
reversed card can show people going through the motions of a 
love affair, with one or both of them not really caring. 

If we look at the card as signifying the self, then reversed 
indicates a split between what we do and what we feel, 
between action and emotion. 



CUPS 


69 



Figure 28 

ACE 

From the King’s conflicting emotions, through the various 
balances of celebration and passivity, we arrive Anally at the 
Ace - emblem of love underpinning life. The Ace of Cups has 
the immediate meaning of a time of happiness and love, a gift 
of joy. J ust as fire makes the world, so love gives it value. 

The Smith picture, with its dove and wafer, specifically 
shows the Holy Grail, said to contain the physical presence of 
the Holy Ghost at work in the world. In the more subtle 
versions of the King Arthur legend, it was not really chivalry — 
that is, a moral structure - that held together King Arthur's 
glorious kingdom, but rather the secret presence of the Holy 
Grail hidden in the land. When the Grail left (because 
Arthur’s knights failed to approach it in a spiritual way) the 
kingdom fell apart. The allegory tells us that the world does 
not function primarily by its laws, its moral order and its 
social structures, but rather by the spiritual basis which gives 
all these things meaning, and protects them from corruption. 
When we look at existence as something solely to be con¬ 
quered (the way Arthur’s knights went after the Grail) we 
bring only chaos. Cups - Water - symbolize receptivity. Love, 
and ultimately life, cannot be seized, but only accepted. 



70 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


REVERSED 

The reversed Ace always brings disruption. Here we see 
unhappiness, violence, destruction - the very conditions acted 
out in the King Arthur legend when the Grail had left the 
kingdom. The reversed card can indicate simply that the times 
have turned against us and we can only accept that life brings 
problems as well as joy. Or, the card upside down can imply 
that we ourselves bring about our unhappiness by not 
recognizing what life offers us, or by reacting violently when 
what we need is calm. 


Chapter 3 

S words 



In many ways Swords are the most difficult suit. The very 
object, a weapon, signifies pain, anger, destruction, and it is 
mostly these experiences that the Swords image depict. Yet a 
sword can also symbolize cutting through illusions and com¬ 
plicated problems (remember Alexander cutting through the 
Gordian knot). Galahad, the knight who achieved the Holy 
Grail, could not begin his spiritual quest until he had received 
his magic sword from Merlin, the kingdom’s guide. Similarly, 
we cannot begin our own quests for meaning and value in life 
until we have learned to recognize and accept the truth, 
whatever pain it brings. 

Swords belong to the element of Air, or wind, often seen as 
the closest to Ether, or Spirit. The word ‘spirit’ relates directly 


72 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


to the word 'breath’, and in Hebrew the word for ‘spirit’ and 
the word for ‘wind’ are the same. Just as air constantly moves, 
so the mind never rests, twisting and turning, sometimes 
violent, sometimes calm, but always moving. Anyone who has 
tried to meditate will know how persistently the mind moves. 

One problem connected with Swords is that of‘ungrounded 
thought’ or what we might call a ‘Hamlet complex’. The mind 
sees so many sides to a situation, so many possibilities, that 
understanding, let alone action, becomes impossible. Because 
our culture has always emphasized rationality, many people 
today see thinking in general as the cause of all life's problems. 
If we just stop thinking, they tell us, then everything will work 
out all right. Even if such a thing were possible, the Tarot tells 
us it would not benefit us. We do not overcome the problem of 
an element by banishing it or replacing it with something, but 
rather by combining it with other elements. The fact is, the 
more confused we are the more we need our minds, because 
nothing else can sort out the truth. We need also, however, to 
combine Air with Water - that is, emotion with receptivity. 
We need also to combine it with Ether, Spirit, the deep values 
grounded in spiritual/psychological truth that we see em¬ 
bodied in the Major Arcana. Then the problem of Air changes 
to the Way, wisdom. 

The more obvious problem shown in Swords is that of 
sorrow, pain, anger - the stormy side of Air. We cannot 
overcome these things by ignoring them, but we can add to 
Swords the optimism of Wands, and we can use Pentacles to 
take ourselves out of our emotions through an involvement 
with work, nature, the outside world. 



SWORDS 


73 




(a) (b) (c) 

Figure 29 

KING 

As a maintainer of the social structure the King represents 
authority, power, and judgement. He takes the mental energy 
of Air and uses it to uphold and rule the world with the 
keenness of his mind and the force of his personality. His 
crown is yellow, the colour of mental energy, while his mantle 
is purple, for wisdom. His cap, a burnouse-like head-dress, is 
red, the colour of action. The King's intellect does not exist for 
itself alone, but rather for what it can do, as a tool of authority. 
Similarly, his sword, unlike that of the Queen of Swords or of 
Justice, does not point straight up, for pure wisdom, but 
rather tilts slightly to the right, the side of action. The require¬ 
ment to act upon his judgements tends to distort the power of 






74 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


judgement itself, a fact we can see if we compare the situation 
of an academic observer of politics with that of someone 
running a country. 

Moreover, the emphasis on social-minded ‘realism’ may 
narrow his viewpoint to a very limited materialism. We can 
see him in the man or woman priding him or herself on tough- 
minded common sense, with no time for ‘mystic mumbo 
jumbo’. Such people usually ignore how much of their 
thinking depends on preconception and prejudice, rather than 
observation of life. 

Notice the resemblance to the Emperor. We can call the 
King the Emperor’s representative in the real world. While 
the trump embodies the archetype of order, law, society, the 
King of Swords maintains these principles in practice. 

Two birds, the animal emblem of the Swords court cards, 
fly behind the throne. The bird symbolizes the mind’s ability 
to take us into the high air of wisdom, removed from fiery 
passion, watery emotion, or earthly material corruption. The 
number two, on the other hand, symbolizes choice, the 
constant tension between abstract thought and the action that 
must be taken in the world. 

But if the birds symbolize the mind’s ability to climb above 
the world they also symbolize the remoteness such an attitude 
can produce. Notice, that the King’s throne is seemingly in the 
clouds. Like the King of Wands, the Swords King can tend 
towards arrogance, his powerful mind and will setting him 
above the more confused people around him. In social terms 
the imagery suggests the tendency of government and rulers to 
divorce their judgements from the real needs of people. In 
more personal terms, we see the remote King in men or 
women who are harsh, cold, judgemental. As a husband or 
lover, the King of Swords often indicates a domineering or 
controlling person. 

In his best sense the King of Swords evokes Justice, the card 
directly beneath the Emperor in the Major Arcana. When he 
connects with this trump, the King stands for social justice, 
wise laws, and above all, a commitment to intellectual 
honesty, and the need to put knowledge into practice. Like 
Justice, and alone of all the court cards, he stares directly out 
at us, a master of wisdom compelling us to recognize and hold 
to the truth. 



SWORDS 


75 


REVERSED 

Right side up the King walks a narrow line between commit¬ 
ted intellect and power for its own sake. Reversed, he tends to 
fall on the wrong side of that line. He is authority corrupted, 
strength used for its own ends of power and dominance. 

In readings, we must always take such strong imagery into 
consideration. The reversed King (or any reversed court card) 
may simply mean some person in difficulty. In connection 
with the Queen or the Knight it may mean a difficult relation¬ 
ship or a failure to mature (see the section on Readings for 
relationships between court cards of the same suit). By itself, 
however, it symbolizes the arrogance of a powerful mind 
turned in on itself, recognizing only its own desire for control. 



Figure iO 

QUEEN 

As the yin aspect of the suit, the Queen of Swords symbolizes 
experiences of both sorrow and wisdom, and especially the 
connection between them. Having experienced pain (the card 
sometimes signifies widowhood), and having faced it with 
courage, acceptance, and honesty, she has found wisdom. 

The tassel hanging from her left wrist (the side of 
experience) resembles a cut rope (compare the Eight of 
Swords, p.82). She has used the sword of her intellect to free 
herself from confusion, doubt, and fear; now, although she 


76 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


frowns at the world, she opens her hand to it. Though clouds 
gather around her, her head remains above them in the clear 
air of truth. One bird, a symbol of the purity of her wisdom, 
flies high above her. Her sword, like that of Justice and the 
Ace, stands straight up. 

In the sense that powerless women will often suffer from the 
actions of men, the card refers specifically to women. In its 
character, it can represent someone of either sex, for neither 
sorrow nor courage are restricted by gender. 

REVERSED 

The reversed Queen can indicate an overemphasis on sorrow, 
someone who makes life seem much worse than it is by 
ignoring the good things around her. She can also show a 
strong mind turned nasty, especially as a reaction to pain or 
pressure from unpleasant situations or people. Sometimes she 
represents a person so forceful she or he expects, not just 
demands, that everyone around her, even life itself, will do 
what she wants. 

When people oppose her, the Queen turns malicious, 
narrow minded, bigoted, and like the King, uses her attitudes 
to force her personality on the people around her. Whether 
she represents an excess of sorrow or egoism, she has lost the 
right side up commitment to truth. 



SWORDS 


77 



The young Knight, whose youth makes him both freer of 
social responsibility than the King, and less tempered by 
experience than the Queen, rides directly into the storm, 
waving his sword in his eagerness to overcome all difficulties. 
He is brave, skilful, strong; yet he tends also towards wildness, 
even fanatacism. He recognizes no limits. 

And yet he often does not know how to sustain a long 
struggle. He expects his enemies and life’s problems to fall 
under his charge and cannot so easily handle a situation that 
requires long, steady plodding. 

His eagerness suggests a certain innocence, like a young 
knight who has never lost a battle. His bravery, his skill, his 
readiness to charge all problems, can sometimes contain a fear 
of losing that innocence, that strong belief in himself. For he 
knows inside that he has yet to face and overcome life's greater 
difficulties. The opposite in many ways of the Knight of Cups, 
he directs all his energy outwards; he is perhaps nervous of 
being quietly alone with himself. 

REVERSED 

As with the King and Queen his weaknesses take over. He is 
extravagant, careless, excessive. His charge becomes wild, a 
mistaken response to a situation that calls for a quieter more 
careful approach. 


78 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 32 

PAGE 

A much lighter card than the other court Swords, the Page 
represents a very different approach to problems than the 
Knight (notice that while the King and Queen emphasize 
wisdom, the two ‘younger' cards deal with Swords' more 
immediate quality of conflict). Rather than charge them he 
finds it sufficient to simply get above them, to find the high 
ground. Instead of solving conflicts or meeting opposition he 
detaches himself. 

If the situation is one that calls for such an easygoing 
approach then the Page’s unattached attitude is very bene¬ 
ficial. But if a more difficult problem is involved, then the 
Page's practice becomes hard to maintain. It requires 
‘vigilance’ to use Waite’s term, making sure that people or 
situations do not get too close. Much of the Page’s energy goes 
to looking over his shoulder. As a somewhat aged student, 
Hamlet embodied the Page's attitude of observation and 
irony. His situation, however, called for the aggressive 
approach of the Knight. 

Because of his detached quality the Page can sometimes 
indulge himself in spying on people, either literally, or 
figuratively, as an attitude to life. In other words, he may look 
on human life as a kind of curious spectacle in which he 
himself does not expect to take part. 


SWORDS 


79 


REVERSED 

Here we see the effect of the Page’s aloof attitude in a situation 
that requires more force. The vigilance turns to paranoia; 
everyone appears to be an enemy- What began as a feeling of 
‘I’m above all that, I don’t need to concern myself with that,’ 
becomes an obsession with problems and a seeming inability 
to do anything about them. Such feelings of weakness art- 
endemic to Swords; they require Wands for courage and 
optimism. 



Figure 33 

TEN 

From the blue skies of the court cards to the black gloom of the 
Ten and Nine. Just as the Ten of Cups showed joy overflow¬ 
ing, so the Ten of Swords fills us with pain. Despite the 
extreme picture the card does not represent death, or even 
especially violence. It signifies more of a reaction to problems 
than the problems themselves. 

It takes only one sword to kill someone. The ten swords in 
the man’s body, even including one in his ear, suggest 
hysteria, and the adolescent attitude that ‘no one has ever 
suffered so much as me', ‘my life is over’, and so on. Notice 
that in contrast to the Nine the sky clears in the distance, the 
black clouds give way to sunshine, and that in contrast to the 
Five or the Two, the water lies placidly. The situation is not so 
bad as it looks. 









80 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


REVERSED 

'['urn this card round and we can imagine the swords failing 
out of his back. Waite describes it as success and advantage, 
but not permanent. These ideas suggest that when a situation 
changes, the problems may go away for the moment. 
However, the person must now take advantage of this relief by 
making a real change in her or his condition - either practical 
or mental, depending on the need — so that the situation will 
not revert to what it w-as. The card bears a relationship to the 
Ten of Wands reversed, where we saw the danger of picking 
up the sticks again once the situation has calmed down. 



Figure 34 

NINE 

The image of deepest sorrow, of utmost mental pain. Where 
the Queen frees herself by turning sorrow into wisdom, and 
the Three suggests the calm of acceptance, the Nine shows the 
moment of agony, of dissolution. The Swords do not stick in 
her back, but hang in the black air above her. Very often the 
Nine refers not to something happening directly to us, but 
rather to someone we love. 

Love, in fact, fills the card and gives it its meaning. The 
blanket design shows roses, symbol of passion, alternating 
with the signs of the zodiac. In the card’s deepest sense it 
shows a mind that takes on itself all the sorrows of the world. 





SWORDS 


81 


the Lamed Vav, or Just Man, of Jewish legend. 

Can we see a way out of such dreadful pain? Both Buddha 
and Christ pictured the world as a place of unending sorrow, 
yet both also said that tragedy remains always a half truth, 
that the universe seen as a whole brings joy and peace. And 
Nietzsche wrote of embracing existence so completely, with 
such total ecstatic honesty, that we would gladly repeat, 
endlessly, every moment of our lives, whatever the pain. 

REVERSED 

For the Nine reversed Waite gives one of his most suggestive 
formulas: ‘Imprisonment, suspicion, doubt, reasonable fear, 
and shame’. The words delineate a state of mind or rather a 
progression of states that result when people retreat into 
themselves from some problem they do not dare to confront. 

As with the card right side up, the reversed card deals with 
our reaction to something outside ourselves, but here it is 
oppression rather than tragedy. The key term is ‘reasonable 
fear’, which can refer to, say, political oppression - as of racial 
or sexual minorities; or social oppression - a feeling of being a 
scapegoat because of appearance, speech, etc.; or simply the 
personal oppression of a domineering family or partner. The 
important thing is that the problem is real, but because we 
cannot directly attack it, we tend to hide in ourselves, keeping 
in our anger and resentment. 

Anger turned in on itself becomes depression and from 
there suspicion. The person who was laughed at as a child for 
her big nose thinks that everyone is looking at her. The black 
person believes that any complaint at work is a racial slur. 
And suspicion easily leads to self-doubt and shame. Often it 
does not even help, at least not completely, if we rationally 
know that we have no reason to feel ashamed, that in fact 
those who have ridiculed or oppressed us should feel the 
shame. Unless the oppressed self-doubting person takes 
action, expresses her or his anger, makes real changes in her 
or his life, the deep hidden shame will remain. 



82 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 3.5 

EIGHT 

From the Nine reversed we move to an even clearer image of 
oppression. We see a person tied up, surrounded by swords 
with a castle - symbol of authority - behind her; she stands in 
the mud, an image of humiliation and shame. Notice, 
however, that the swords do not actually fence her in, and the 
ropes do not go around her legs, while the people who have 
tied her up do not appear at all in the card. In short, nothing 
prevents her from just leaving. 

The clue to this card is the blindfold - symbolizing confu¬ 
sion, oppressive ideas, isolation from other people in similar 
situations; what political liberationists call ''mystification' - 
keeping people down not by direct force, but by training them 
to believe in their own helplessness. In that remarkable way 
the Tarot has of summing up a complex situation the card can 
almost stand as a diagram of the oppressed condition. 

On a very different level the Eight of Swords acts as a Gate 
to a special awareness. By identifying with it we gain a sense 
of our own ignorant condition, something which many people 
will intellectually recognise (paradox of paradoxes) but not 
really accept. Without enlightenment, or what some Sufis and 
others call ‘conscious evolution', we can never really know 
ourselves or the world, can never say ‘This is the truth; this is 
the way things really are'. Recognition of ignorance is the first 



SWORDS 


83 


(and often the hardest) step to true knowledge. 

REVERSED 

Freedom begins when we throw' off our blindfolds, when we 
see clearly how we have arrived in whatever situation we are 
in, what we have done, what others have done (particularly 
those who have bound us, but also others in similar situa¬ 
tions), and what we can do about it now. The reversed Eight 
means, in general, liberation from some oppressive situation; 
primarily it refers to the first step of such liberation, that is, 
seeing things as clearly as possible. 



Figure.}() 

SEVEN 

The theme of struggle continues. Here we see an image of 
taking action against problems. Sometimes the card means 
simply a daring act, even a coup that takes the sting out of 
opposition. More often, it stands for an impulsive act when a 
careful plan is required. 

The picture shows us someone grinning as he makes off 
with his enemy’s weapons. He has not attacked the camp, he 
cannot even carry all the swords. The card implies schemes 
and actions that do not solve anything. Not as obvious, but 
sometimes more important, is the sense of isolation involved. 
He is acting alone, unable or unwilling to get anyone’s help. 





84 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Going a step further, this card can indicate craftiness, but 
with the flaw of habitually hiding, often for no real reason, 
one's true plans or intentions. 

REVERSED 

The isolation turns around to become communication, in par¬ 
ticular seeking advice on what to do about one's problems. 
Valuable as the specific instructions can be, just as important 
is the person’s readiness to listen and to seek help. The card 
can sometimes refer to the act of finding help, such as consult¬ 
ing a reader or a therapist or simply friends. 

Like all else the value of the image depends on context. 
Where self-reliance is required the Seven of Swords reversed 
can imply an overdependence on others telling us what to do. 
When the card reversed appears in opposition to the Fool or 
the Hanged Man, we must look to the other cards to deter¬ 
mine which course - independence or seeking advice — will 
produce the best results. 



Figure 37 

SIX 

A strange and powerful image, this card more than any other 
illustrates how Pamela Smith’s images reach beyond Arthur 
Waite's formulas. The Pictorial Key says ‘journey by water, 
route, way, expedient'. But the picture of a ferryboat at 



SWORDS 


85 


twilight, carrying shrouded figures to a wooded isle, suggests a 
more spiritual journey - in myth, Charon carrying the dead 
across the River Styx. A great silence fills this card, like the 
silence of Salvador Dali’s paintings. 

Usually this card does not signify death, though it can 
indicate mourning; nor does it show transformation, in the 
sense of Death in the Major Arcana. Rather it depicts a quiet 
passage through a difficult time. Waite says, ‘The freight is 
light’; and Eden Gray writes, ‘The swords do not weigh down 
the boat’. Though we carry our troubles with us we have 
adapted to them; they will not sink us or bear us down. On a 
simple level it means functioning in some difficult situation 
without attacking the problems. It can refer to an immedaite 
problem or a situation that has gone on for years. Looking 
deeper we see the image of a long sorrow - mourning is an 
example, but not the only one - which a person has felt for so 
long that it no longer gives pain, but has become part of life. 

There is another, less disturbing meaning - that of a quiet 
passage, physically (certainly the literal meaning of a journey 
must not be forgotten) or spiritually, a time of easy transition. 
Notice the ferryman’s black pole. Black indicates potentiality; 
where nothing final has happened, all things remain possible. 
By staying calm we waste neither energy nor opportunity. 

The Six of Swords is a Gate. Looking at it with sensitivity 
and then entering the picture will produce first a quieting 
effect on the mind and then later, slowly, a sense of movement 
within the self. 

REVERSED 

Seen in one way the balance and peace become disturbed; the 
passage is no longer serene for the water, symbol of emotion, 
becomes stirred up. So the reversed card can suggest a stormy 
journey, physically or spiritually. It can refer also to the idea 
that when we try to attack some longstanding problem, 
especially one accepted by everyone else, we agitate the situa¬ 
tion. As one example, an unsatisfying or oppressive relation¬ 
ship can go quietly along for years until one of the members 
decides to do something about it. To try to remove the swords 
from the boat can sink it, for the swords, after all, are plugging 
up the holes. 

In another way, the Six reversed can show communication, 
reminding us that right side up the people maintain their com- 



86 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


posure by not speaking or looking at each other. If the swords 
symbolize unhappy memories and the silence is a defence then 
communication can be painful. It can also begin healing. 



Figure 38 

FIVE 

One of the most difficult cards, and one of the reasons why 
some people find the Rider pack too negative. And yet it 
mirrors a real situation that most people will experience at 
some time in their lives. 

All the Fives show conflict or loss. Swords carry this idea to 
the extreme of defeat. Sometimes the meaning of the card will 
focus on the large figure in the foreground - the victor. More 
commonly we identify with the two figures turned away. They 
have lost some battle, and now the whole world bears down on 
them - the water choppy, the sky jagged. A sense of humilia¬ 
tion as well as weakness goes with their defeat. 

The image of an enemy can refer to a real person, to an 
overall situation or to an inner feeling of inadequacy. Once I 
did a reading for two people who had suffered at the hands of 
a disturbed and vengeful boss, and who now wanted to know if 
they should bring him to court. They decided against it when 
the Five of Swords indicated they would lose. Later two other 
people did sue the man for the same kind of misconduct. They 
lost the case. 




SWORDS 


87 


REVERSED 

The painful quality remains, though the emphasis may shift. 
Where right side up indicates the moment of defeat, reversed 
extends this to the despair felt afterwards. It is a difficult state 
to overcome, though other influences, particularly those sym¬ 
bolized by Wands, may help. 

Swords are more pessimistic than any cards in the Major 
Arcana. Taken alone, no Minor suit can show the true 
balance of life. They break experience into parts and therefore 
distort and exaggerate. An excess of Swords cards needs more 
than any other suit to be balanced with experiences and 
attitudes from the other suits elements. 



Figure 39 

FOUR 

Fours relate to stabilization; for the unhappy Swords this 
translates as rest or even just retreat. The image shows not 
death but withdrawal. People sometimes respond to 
difficulties by isolating themselves, literally hiding in their 
houses, or simply flattening their emotional reactions to hide 
inside themselves. This card once appeared in a reading for a 
man accustomed to dealing forcefully with everyone around 
him. The card showed him that when his aggressiveness 
failed, or when his confident mask grew too heavy for him, he 
hid from the world rather than show his other side or try to 
work with other people. 




88 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Withdrawal, however, can also lead to healing, if the 
purpose is not to hide but to recoup strength. The card can 
mean holding back from a fight until there is a better chance 
of winning. Similarly, by withdrawing for a time after some 
deep hurt a person gives him or herself a chance to recover. 

Notice that the knight lies in a church, and that the window 
shows Christ giving a healing blessing to a supplicant. The 
imagery suggests the Fisher King of the Grail legend, whose 
physical wound mirrored the spiritual sickness of the 
kingdom. The picture also recalls Sleeping Beauty. Both these 
figures needed outsiders to awaken them. The King lay ill 
until Galahad brought the Grail’s blessing; and the princess, 
symbol of a neurotic fear of life, remained asleep until the 
prince, refusing to be stopped by the fence of thorns (the 
neurotic will use the force of her or his personality to set up 
barriers against other people), roused her through sexual life- 
energy (in the Disney version he kisses her; in folk tales he has 
intercourse with her). Withdrawal, even for the purpose of 
recovery, can shut a person off from the world, creating a kind 
of spell only outside energy can break. 

REVERSED 

Reversed this card shows a return to the world. Whether this 
comes about quietly or dramatically depends on the situation. 
Sometimes the card refers to caution, as if the knight emerges 
carefully from his sanctuary. At other times the Four reversed 
can represent other people perceiving and breaking through 
the fence - the prince coming after Sleeping Beauty. 



SWORDS 


89 



Figure 40 

THREE 

The Golden Dawn title for this card is ‘Sorrow'. Of all the 
Swords, the Three most simply represents pain and heart¬ 
break. Yet, for all its gloom, the picture brings a certain calm 
in the symmetry of its swords. To true sorrow we can make 
only one response - take the pain into our hearts, accept it and 
go beyond it. The Nine raised the question of how to continue 
after a great anguish. The Three tells us that we must not 
push the pain away from us, but somehow take it deep inside 
until it becomes transformed by courage and love. 

Once, in a reading for myself, after a death in my family, 
the Three of Swords came up crossed by the Three of Cups. At 
first I thought this meant setting joy and friendship against 
sorrow. Two cards of the same number, however, often mean 
a transformation. And the crossing card often emerges from 
the first in some way. Looking deeper into the reading, I saw 
the two as connected, not opposed. Acceptance and love can 
turn pain into joyful memory, an embracing of life. 

REVERSED 

The healing process becomes blocked when we fight accep¬ 
tance. If something in life appears too painful we may push it 
away, try not to think about it, and avoid any reminders. Such 
an attitude keeps the pain forever with us, and in fact 



90 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


increases its hold. Waite writes: ‘mental alienation ... 
disorder, confusion’. A reading once for a woman showed 
great potential for development in many areas, yet the 
outcome appeared very mediocre, weak. In the position of 
background lay the Three of Swords reversed. Earlier the 
woman had spoken of the ways in which she had never got 
over the death of her father. 



(a) Figure 41 (b) 

TWO 

One method of handling problems or opposition is to push 
everything away beyond an emotional fence. If we let nothing 
approach us, then nothing can hurt us. In contrast to the 
Eight, the blindfold here shows not confusion, but a deliberate 
closing of the eyes. The figure has tied it on herself so that she 
will not have to choose between friend and enemy, for such 
choice becomes the first step in once again involving herself 
with other people. The swords remain ready to strike anyone 
who tries to come close. They represent anger and fear 
creating a precarious balance; the one wants to strike out, the 
other wants to hide, and so the person remains tensed between 
them. 

Notice, however, the effect this posture has on the woman. 
First of all, the crossed arms close off her heart. The imagery 
of blocked emotions continues in the way the grey dress seems 








SWORDS 


91 


to merge into the stone seat. At the same time the heavy 
swords raise the centre of gravity from the solar plexus to the 
chest. When a person holds in emotions the breathing 
becomes shallower, the body becomes rigid. Paradoxically, 
the attempt to stop emotion makes a person more emotional, 
as she or he thinks and acts not from the centre but from the 
constricted chest, seeing not the world, but her own image 
behind the blindfold. 

Compare the Two of Swords to the High Priestess, number 
2, in the Major Arcana. They sit in similar postures, but 
where the Priestess appears relaxed, tension coats the Two of 
Swords. A veil separates the Priestess from the waters of the 
unconscious hidden behind her; no veil protects the blind¬ 
folded woman from her disturbed pool of emotions. And yet 
that shallow pool is not the same water as that behind the 
Priestess. 

The weight of the swords makes it easy for the woman to be 
tipped over into the choppy waters. Because it makes us con¬ 
centrate on the emotions, a defensive attitude makes us more 
prone to outbursts, to anger and hysteria. 

REVERSED 

The balance is lost - or given up. Either the person becomes 
knocked over by people or problems charging her defences, or 
else the blindfold is given up for the purpose of either seeing 
truth or communicating. The latter experience can prove very 
emotional, even shattering if the person does not receive help 
from outside. 



92 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



lug ure 12 

ACE 


The final (first) Sword card returns us to the true essence of 
the suit - intellect. Pointing straight up for true perception, 
the sword pierces the crown of the material world. Wisdom 
leads us beyond illusions and limitations to the spiritual truth 
contained within life. Many of the Swords cards suffer from 
the illusion that life contains only sorrow and pain. The 
mountains symbolize ‘abstract truth’, objective facts of 
existence, independent of personal viewpoint and experience. 
The Major Arcana depicts this truth for us; more than any 
other Minor card the Ace of Swords reaches through to the 
fifth element. However, intellect alone, divorced from intui¬ 
tion, will only lead to more illusion. We need the Ace of Cups, 
that is, love, to find the truth; yet only intellect can take us 
beyond immediate experience. 

Many people maintain that only our emotions express the 
real us, that emotional reactions alone will lead us to the 
truth. Often, however, emotions are exaggerated, egotistic, or 
self-indulgent. But neither will intellect alone bring real 
awareness. Both truth and awareness must come from a 
deeper level of spiritual values and experience. And so the 
hands come from clouds, leading us back to Spirit. 

The symbolism of truth holds for mundane experiences as 
well. In confusing, emotional, or oppressive situations, the 



SWORDS 


93 


mind can pierce the fog and knots to give a clear understan¬ 
ding of the real facts. Truth expresses the Ace in its most 
valuable form. On another level the card signifies simply 
emotional force, both love and hate, in extreme forms. Notice 
the tight grip. The emotions, too, are a gift, enabling us to 
experience life intensely, but they always remain hard to hold 
and harder still to direct. 

REVERSED 

The grip fails, bringing illusion, confused ideas and feelings, 
overpowering emotions. The more violent feelings overcome 
the benevolent ones. Without a clear sense of reality, the mind 
can fall prey to mistakes created by emotion. Problems 
become exaggerated; everything, including attractions, 
appears to be more important than it actually is. In such 
situations, the Ace of Swords reversed tells us to take hold of 
ourselves and try to find a balanced sense of reality. 


tentacles 



Our culture has a long history of despising the physical world. 
We see Adam’s creation out of clay as a humiliation - ‘ashes 
to ashes, dust to dust’. We insult people by ‘treating them like 
dirt’. Emotions and abstract thoughts are seen as ‘higher' 
than anything w'hich actually exists. And yet, just as a 
painting is the end result of an artist 's conception, so we can 
see the mortal world as the product of God’s creative force. 
For us, creation means the world of our senses. However far 
we may travel in spiritual meditations we must begin and 
return here - or lose ourselves in the process. 

A famous Qabalistic tale illustrates this need for ‘groun¬ 
ding’. Through study and meditation four rabbis entered 
Paradise. Rabbi Ben Azai experienced such ecstasy that he 



PENTACLES 


95 


fell dead on the spot. Rabbi Ben Zoma, overwhelmed by the 
flood of experience, went mad. Rabbi Ben Abuysh saw what 
looked like two Gods, a contradiction of the basic tenet of 
monotheism, and thereby became an apostate. Only Rabbi 
Akiba entered and left in peace. We can explain this story in 
terms of Tarot symbolism. Rabbi Ben Azai went too far in the 
direction of Fire and so burned himself out. Rabbi Ben Zoma 
allowed his emotions (Water) to overcome his reason. Rabbi 
Ben Abuysh, overbalanced with Swords energy, took both 
what he saw and what he read in the Scriptures too literally. 
Rabbi Akiba, able to balance the other elements in Earth, 
understood his experience in the true w'ay. 

In its earlier form of Coins, Pentacles stood primarily for 
materialism in the narrow sense of money and work. We still 
see these important qualities in the Rider pack, and indeed 
Pentacles carry the problem of becoming so involved with 
these things that we forget anything else exists — the reverse, in 
a way, of Rabbi Akiba. The Rider pack, however, adds the 
greater dimension of nature to the fourth suit. We ground our¬ 
selves not just in our work but in a love for the world around 
us. 

As a magical sign, Pentacles symbolize the ‘magic* of 
ordinary creation. Taken simply this means the beauty of 
nature, the joy of satisfying work. The symbolism, however, 
carries a deeper meaning, hinted at in the story of Rabbi 
Akiba. The mystic or magician does not simply ground the 
self in a negative way, using the world as the opposite of 
spiritual experience. Rather, the natural world, because it 
carries a firmer reality than the other elements, because it 
does not lead so easily to confusion or misconception or ill use, 
opens the way to more mystic experience. 

The very mundaneness of day-to-day life ensures, by a kind 
of law of reciprocity, that such things possess a greater ‘magic’ 
than the more immediate attractions of the other elements. 
We cannot understand this paradox immediately. We need to 
ponder and experience it. Two facts about Pentacles/Earth 
will hint at its true value. First, in a study of religious leaders, 
ancient and modern, the astrologer Ronnie Dreyer has found 
that Earth signs predominate throughout their charts. 
Second, Pentacles contains more Gate cards than any other 
suit. 


... 


96 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



(a) Figure 43 (b) 

KING 

The mundaneness of Pentacles goes very well with the social 
responsibility of the King, who presents to us the very image of 
the successful business or professional man. The casual way 
he sits on his throne, the fond way he looks at his pentacle - 
here the symbol of his capabilities and his achievements - 
show him satisfied with life. He is generous, even courageous, 
though not especially given to adventure. The role of King 
does not frustrate him as it does the Kings of Wands and 
Cups. Perhaps at an earlier stage of his life and career he 
might have suffered from impatience or doubt. Now his 
success has justified his life, allowing him to relax and enjoy it. 

Enjoying life means a closeness to nature as well. Though 
his castle - symbol of his dominant place in society - rises in 
the background, he sits in his garden, with flowers on his 
crown, and with grapes - symbol of life's sweetness - decorat¬ 
ing his robe. The very leaves and flowers seem to merge with 
his robe, just as the water flowed into the Queen of Cups’ 
dress. Life is good to him and he means to enjoy it. 

A Tarot reading once produced the Fool crossed by the 
King of Pentacles (the two cards greatly resemble each other 
in their colour schemes). The conjunction forms a fine 
example of what 1 call vertical and horizontal time, that is, the 
inner and outer worlds. The King symbolizes ordinary 



PENTACLES 


97 


activity, accomplishments, social position, success, while the 
Fool stands for the inner spiritual freedom that allows a 
person to enjoy these things and build upon them without 
getting trapped in a narrow materialist view. Consider two 
people with the same outer worlds - both successful, 
respected, wealthy; yet inwardly one may be tense, or 
frustrated, or afraid, while the other remains joyful and at 
peace. 

If we see the Fool as the beginning of the Major Arcana, the 
King of Pentacles as the final card of the Minor, then the two 
stand at opposite ends of the Tarot. But this polarity holds 
true only if we see the cards in a line. If we envision them in a 
circle, then the Fool and the King of Pentacles become joined 
together. 

REVERSED 

The King is meant for success. Reversing him suggests failure 
or simply mediocrity. The lack of fulfilment brings dissatisfac¬ 
tion, feelings of weakness, and doubt. Taken another way we 
can see the upside down King as symbolizing the idea of 
success corrupted, the image of a man or a woman who will 
use any means to achieve his or her goals. 

If we describe the King of Pentacles as someone who needs 
a vital connection with nature (and not everyone does, despite 
contemporary assumptions), the King reversed stands for the 
state of being cut off from that rejuvenating Row. Here too 
the break results in dissatisfaction, weakness, even psychic 
danger. 


98 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



( a) Figure 44 ( b) 

QUEEN 

Where the King sits before a castle the Queen's throne stands 
entirely in a field, framed by roses. Where the King simply 
glances at his Pentacle, the Queen holds hers in both hands, 
intensely aware of the magic in nature and the strength she 
derives from it. More than any other Minor card she repre¬ 
sents a love for and unity with the world. The rabbit in the 
lower right-hand corner stands not only for sexual fertility, 
but also for the spiritual fruitfulness of a life that has found its 
own rhythm in the world around it. 

Her qualities, as well as the sexual symbolism, relate her to 
the patron of Pentacles, the Empress. At the same time, as a 
Minor figure she carries a quality lacking in the archetypal 
trump of passion: self-awareness. She knows and believes in 
herself, and in the magic of her life. In readings, this quality of. 
seif-trust will often prove the most important. 

If the King stands beside the Fool then the Queen belongs 
with the Magician. Like him she wears a red robe over a white 
shirt; leaves and flowers frame both of them; a yellow sky 
shines behind each. Where the Magician manipulates the 
forces hidden in the world, the Queen of Pentacles joins 
herself to those forces, allowing them to flow through her into 
her daily life. 



PENTACLES 


99 


REVERSED 

In readings, the Queen reversed can mean not trusting oneself 
in some specific situation. More generally it refers to psychic 
weakness. For cutting off the Queen from her vital connection 
to the earth results, even more so than with the King, in 
nervousness and confusion. She becomes afraid, even phobic, 
mistrustful of others and especially of herself, doubting her 
abilities and her value as a person. This separation means 
more than being isolated from plants and animals. Rather it 
means a loss of daily rhythm in life, a dissatisfaction with the 
whole environment, and an inability to appreciate what the 
environment has to offer. 

In a reading the Queen reversed not only points out these 
qualities in the subject, but suggests a dual remedy. First, a 
build up in confidence; besides emphasizing his or her 
accomplishments and good qualities a person can do this 
through meditation with the Queen right side up. Second, a 
grounding of the emotions in natural things, ordinary 
pleasures, satisfying work. 



Figure 45 

KNIGHT 

The Knight's responsibility for action brings out the suit's 
practical qualities. At the same time, denying the Knight’s 
natural penchant for adventure tends to distort and narrow 


100 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


his attitude to life. He is responsible, hardworking, 
uncomplaining. In his best sense he is deeply rooted to the 
outer world and to simplicity, a quality suggested by the way 
his horse stands firmly on the ground, with its rider sitting 
upright. 

Though he also holds a pentacle he does not look at it, but 
instead stares over it. The symbolism suggests that he has lost 
sight of the source and meaning of his strength in life. In 
dedicating himself to purely practical matters, he has cut 
himself off from the deeper things in Earth. 

REVERSED 

Sometimes the Knight reversed can mean an awakening of 
those other awarenesses. More often it shows a failure - or 
exaggeration - of the Knight's more obvious virtues. His 
steadiness slows down to the point of inertia, his plodding 
responsibility gives way to idleness. A mild personality, taken 
just a little too far, becomes weak and depressed, especially if 
his placidity has covered a repressed desire for either 
adventure or greater advancement. 

The Knight of Pentacles reversed can sometimes indicate a 
crisis. If a person has dedicated her or his life to a job or some 
similar outer responsibility, and that meaning is taken away - 
say through dismissal or retirement — then discouragement 
and depression can overcome him or her. Another example 
would be a woman who has dedicated her life to her children 
and now finds that they have grown up and away from her. 

Though such extreme meanings of course occur rarely in 
actual readings, they remain implied in the Knight's basic 
paradox: deeply grounded in, yet unaware of, the magic 
beneath him, he identifies himself with his functions. He needs 
to discover the real source of his strength, within himself and 
in life. 


PENTACLES 


101 



Figure 46 

PAGE 

In direct contrast to the Knight the Page looks at nothing but 
his pentacle, holding it lightly in the air. Where the Knight is 
the prototypical worker the Page represents the student, lost 
in his studies, fascinated, feeling little concern for anything 
outside them. Nevertheless he partakes of the suit's practical 
nature by symbolizing the actual work of the student, the 
study and scholarship, as compared to the inspiration sym¬ 
bolized by the Page of Cups. 

The student here acts as a symbol; the Page need not refer 
to someone actually in school, but simply anyone approaching 
any activity with those qualities of fascination, of involvement, 
of caring less for rewards or social position than for the work 
itself. 

REVERSED 

Again the Page appears as the converse of the Knight. In 
reality the two of them split the Pentacles double qualities - 
practicality and magic. Where the Knight, without his job, 
becomes discouraged and inert, the Page, without his sense of 
hard work, gives way to wildness and dissipation, what Waite 
calls ‘prodigality'. Sometimes, however, the card can mean 
simply relaxation after a difficult task, like a student unwind¬ 
ing after examinations. 



102 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 



Figure 47 

TEN 

One of the most symbolic and deeply-layered Minor cards, 
the Ten shows us the very image of the Gate opening to 
hidden experience in ordinary things. Like the Ten of Cups it 
deals with domestic life, but where the men and women in 
Cups celebrate the gift, the family here does not notice the 
magic all around them. On the surface the card represents the 
established home, the good life, a secure and comfortable 
position in the world. The people concerned, however, appear 
to take the comfort for granted; they find the security boring 
or stifling. In contrast to the Ten of Cups (the two cards will 
often appear together in readings) the family here does not 
seem to communicate with each other. The man and woman 
face opposite ways, though the woman glances anxiously over 
her shoulder at the man. The child hangs on nervously to its 
mother, but looks away. And none of them notices the old 
man outside the arch. 

Though the card expresses mundaneness, magic signs cover 
it. The ten pentacles form the Qabalistic Tree of Life, some¬ 
thing which appears nowhere else in the deck. Notice also the 
magic wand resting against the arch; no other Minor card 
contains one. The arch itself bears a relief of balanced scales 
(just above the old man’s head). Now, scales stand for Justice, 
and further, for subtle forces which keep the everyday world 



PENTACLES 


103 

from breaking into chaos. By ‘subtle forces’ I do not mean 
only so-called ‘occult’ laws, such as polarity, or the law of 
correspondences (as above, so below). The term applies also 
to nature’s generally more accepted workings, such as gravity, 
or electro-magnetism. Because we learn about these in school 
we should not consider such phenomena as any the less 
marvellous. The fact is, we all take the universe for granted 
simply because it works so well. 

Even more than the other images, the old man evokes 
magic. He resembles the image, from every culture, of the god 
or angel who comes disguised as a beggar or traveller to visit 
some family, test their virtues of hospitality and generosity, 
and then leave them a magical gift. In the case of Abraham 
and Sarah the angels gave them a son, Isaac. In many such 
stories only the dogs recognize the visitor (just as in other tales 
the dogs alone run from the Devil when he comes in disguise). 
Because they have not buried their instincts in blase human 
rationalism, the dogs can sense the wonderful when it comes 
to call. 

Now, most of these tales emphasize the moral ‘Be nice to 
everyone. You never know whom you might turn away'. But 
we can give the story a more subtle interpretation. By acting a 
certain way, people create in themselves the ability to recognize 
and receive the blessings in the world around them. 

All these hidden signs and wonders point up the basic 
theme of Pentacles: the everyday world contains a magic 
greater than any of us can usually see. The magic is all around 
us, in nature, in the very fact that life exists and that this vast 
universe does not fly apart. 

Inside the arch we see a bright ordinary day; outside darker 
tones prevail, even in the old man’s coat of many colours, with 
its signs of astrology and ritual magic. The family stand under 
the arch posed as in a play. For ail its firm reality, the 
everyday world, the comfortable lives we take for granted, and 
even the troubles and miseries that often occupy our minds, 
are only a play, in which we all follow the parts set out for us 
by our upbringing and by society (the recognition that we are 
a product of our conditioning is the first step to freeing our¬ 
selves from it). 

The true reality remains ancient, dark, and mysterious. 
Though we look through the arch the perspective of the card 
places us outside it, with the demon visitor. By merging with 



104 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


this card we can find ourselves beyond the Gate, looking in at 
the little dramas of our own daily lives. By going further with 
it we can experience that wild vibrant universe existing in the 
very centre of the ordinary. 

When the hero Odysseus arrived home from his wanderings 
in the wild, monster-ridden world outside civilized Greece, he 
came disguised as a beggar. Only his dog recognized him. 
['hough he wore rags, they were glorious rags (much like the 
visitor’s patchwork coat) for the goddess Athena had given 
them to him. Odysseus returned to the domestic world from 
the wild; he destroyed the evil in his house and re-established 
the moral order. Yet first he had to experience what lay 
beyond. The Ten of Pentacles takes us there as well. 

REVERSED 

If the sense of boredom with life increases it can lead to taking 
risks, especially financial or emotional ones. Sometimes, 
depending on the contexts or the projected results, the risks 
are justified; for instance, the Fool beside the Ten of Pentacles 
would urge the gamble. At other times the risks come less 
from need than from impatience with what we already have. 
This situation becomes more pointed when the Ten of Pent- 
acles appears with the Ten of Cups. 

The parallel with Odysseus stands out when the card 
becomes reversed. Most of that hero’s troubles arose because 
of a streak of recklessness that made him do wild things at just 
the wrong moment. The urge to gamble stood in opposition to 
his basic qualities of caution, skill, and foresight. And yet the 
wildness maintained the balance. Without it Odysseus would 
not have seen the world beyond the home and family to which 
he finally returned. 



PENTACLES 


105 



(a) Figure 48 (b) 

NINE 

As material cards Pentacles deal with success and what it 
means in a person’s life. Unlike the figure in Ten the woman 
here is sharply aware of the good things in her life. Her hand 
rests on the Pentacles, her thumb hooks on a grapevine. 
Awareness is one of the card’s basic meanings, especially self- 
awareness and the ability to distinguish what matters in life, 
what goals truly demand our best efforts. The card signifies 
success - but not simply the material benefits; it means as well 
the sense of certainty that comes with knowing one has made 
the right choices and followed them with the necessary 
actions. The pentacles growing on the bushes symbolize a life 
that is productive and alive. 

‘Success’ here means not so much worldly achievement as 
success in ‘creating’ ourselves out of the material given us by 
the circumstances and conditions of our life. And ‘certainty', 
in its strongest sense, means more than looking back and 
seeing that we have done the right thing. It also means the 
ability to know where others can only guess. The Nine of 
Pentacles stands as the emblem of this quality, the true mark 
of the evolved person (for a further discussion see the end of 
the section on Readings); study and meditation with this card 
will therefore help achieve such certainty. 

We have seen that the Nines show' compromises and 




106 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


choices. This theme emerges in Pentacles as well. The woman 
stands alone in her garden. To achieve what she has, she has 
had to give up normal companionship. In readings, this sym¬ 
bolism does not mean that the card inevitably advises giving 
up a relationship; but it does call for self-reliance and a certain 
loneliness in pursuit of goals. 

The image in Fig. 48(b), slightly different from the official 
Rider version (Fig. 48(a)), comes from an American edition of 
several years ago. In this Nine of Pentacles a shadow darkens 
the woman’s face, as well as the grapes on the card’s right- 
hand side. Clearly she is turning aw'ay from the sun. The sym¬ 
bolism suggests a sacrifice. To make of her life what she wants 
she has had to give up not only companionship, but also such 
things as spontaneity, wandering, and recklessness. If the 
sacrifice seems too great, it perhaps means that we do not 
value enough the rewards of self-development. 

The image of the bird carries these ideas further. A soaring 
hunter, the falcon symbolizes the intellect, the imagination, 
the spirit. The hood, however, subdues it to its mistress, that 
is, the conscious will. Therefore, while at first glance the card 
means success, a more intimate knowledge of it shifts the 
primary meaning to that of discipline. And an entry through 
the Gate of this card will help bring one to the joy of true 
discipline, which does not cripple, but soars. 

REVERSED 

The qualities of the card become denied or turned around: 
lack of discipline and the failure that comes from it; projects 
taken up and then abandoned; an inability to channel energy 
into useful purposes. It can mean not knowing what w'e want, 
or what really matters to us. The lack of self-awareness brings 
irresponsibility and faithlessness, to others as well as our¬ 
selves. 


PENTACLES 


107 



Figure 49 

EIGHT 

The way to Spirit for Pentacles lies not so much in success, or 
even awareness of value in ordinary things, as in the work that 
allows us to appreciate those things. The Nine shows 
discipline; the Eight shows the training that brings both 
discipline and skill. 

Work, whether physical, artistic, or spiritual (the Sufi Idries 
Shah speaks of ‘work' as the most basic of Sufi doctrines), 
cannot succeed if the person thinks only of the end result. 
Many artists and writers have testified to this fact, warning 
hopefuls that if they just want to become famous or rich they 
will never succeed. We have to care about the work itself. 

Therefore we see the apprentice lost in his task. And yet 
work also needs to be related to the outside world. However 
much we follow our standards and instincts or seek our own 
development the work we do lacks meaning if it does not serve 
the community. Therefore, behind his shop - though far away 
- stands a city, with a yellow road (yellow for mental action) 
leading to and from the workshop. 

REVERSED 

When reversed the card suggests primarily impatience and the 
situations resulting from it: frustration, unfulfilled ambition, 
envy, or jealousy. These things may result from the attitude of 



108 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


looking only to success, and not to the work that brings it. 
They may also arise from unsatisfying work, that is, a job or 
career which calls for no skill, no personal involvement, no 
pride. 



Figure 50 

SEVEN 

From the image of work we move to its reward. Like the Nine 
the Seven shows the pentacles as a living development from the 
person’s labour. Meaningful work gives more than material 
benefit; the person too grows. The Seven shows that moment 
of being able to look back with satisfaction on something 
accomplished. The ‘something’ may be as broad as a career 
or as simple as an immediate project. The card implies that 
whatever has been built up (including relationships between 
people) has reached a point where it can grow by itself, 
and the person can step back from it without it collapsing. 

REVERSED 

For many people, meaningful work is simply not available. In 
general the Seven reversed shows the pervasive dissatisfaction, 
the trapped feeling, that comes from unsatisfying jobs or com¬ 
mitments. Again, the Seven reversed can mean any specific 
dissatisfaction or anxiety, in particular one arising from some 
project that is not going well. 


i 


PENTACLES 


109 



Figure 51 

SIX 

The next two cards, related by their symbolism, stand among 
the most complex cards of the Minor Arcana, indeed of the 
whole deck. At the same time they demonstrate the difference 
between layers of interpretation and that extra dimension I 
call the Gate; for while the Five allows quite a few meanings 
the Six shows us the Gate mechanism itself. 

On the surface the Six of Pentacles illustrates the idea of 
sharing, generosity, charity. Notice, however, that the people 
form a hierarchy, one above two others. The card therefore 
signifies a relationship in which one person dominates others. 
He or she gives, but always from a basis of superiority. The 
scales are balanced; such relationships are often very stable, 
precisely because the people are well matched. Just as one 
wishes to dominate, the other(s) wishes to be dominated. The 
lower position does not really imply weakness; the dominated 
person often instigates the relationship, and in fact will subtly 
insist on maintaining it when the one who plays the dominant 
role might wish to change. 

Sometimes the hierarchy does not indicate a person but 
rather a situation - emotional, economic, or other - which 
dominates a person or a group of people. It may give them 
very little, but just enough to keep them from looking for 
something else. This can happen in a job which gives material 



110 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


benefit but little satisfaction or chance for improvement; or a 
relationship in which the people are unhappy but comfort¬ 
able; or a political situation where people recognize they are 
oppressed, but do not wish to endanger what little security 
they have. 

The card bears a (distorted) relationship to all those Major 
cards (the Hierophant, the Lovers, the Devil, and others) in 
which some force holds together or reconciles the opposites of 
life. Here nothing becomes truly reconciled, but the situation 
maintains the balance and keeps it going. 

So far the meanings emphasize the two beggars. But what of 
the giver? He shows generosity, yet the balanced scales 
indicate he does not give spontaneously, but rather measures 
out what he thinks he can afford. In other words he gives what 
he will not miss. Emotionally this symbolizes a person who 
relates really easily to others yet always holds back his or her 
deepest feelings. 

As we said above, the relationship comes from both sides. 
Many people will only accept limited ‘gifts' from others. A 
display of strong emotions, for instance, may embarrass or 
scare them. The same may hold true for people who resent 
‘charity’ and put any offer of help in that category. Therefore 
the Six of Pentacles may indicate giving people what they are able 
to receive. 

I have emphasized these words because they imply some¬ 
thing beyond their literal meaning. Most people will uncon¬ 
sciously measure out their giving according to what other 
people expect from them; they avoid making themselves or 
other people uncomfortable. On the other hand, in order con¬ 
sciously to give people what they need and can use (rather than 
what they may think they want) one must have achieved a 
great degree of self-knowledge as well as awareness of human 
psychology in general. Few people really reach this level of 
giving; many people who think they perceive what someone 
else needs are actually projecting their own requirements and 
fears onto that person. As a more objective source of informa¬ 
tion the Tarot can help us understand our own or someone 
else’s needs. Because of these meanings, the Six of Pentacles 
relates to the Nine in the context of that card as an emblem of 
certitude. 

The idea of giving what people are able to receive carries a 
religious meaning as well. Mystics and esotericists often say 


i 



PENTACLES 


111 


that the truth hidden within a specific religion may run almost 
opposite to what that religion appears to say on the surface. 
For instance, while doctrine may teach us to control our 
desires through pious thoughts, the occultist may attempt to 
bring forth and work with her or his most hidden urges. 'This 
split exists because most people are not only incapable of but 
even unwilling to deal with religious/psychological teachings 
in their undisguised form. Even many who try may find the 
truth impossible to assimilate. Consider Rabbi Ben Abuysh, 
who lost his faith when he thought he saw two Gods. 

Idries Shah tells the fable of two men who come upon a 
tribe which harbours a great fear of water-melons, believing 
them to be demons. The first traveller tries to tell them the 
truth and is stoned as a heretic. The second accepts their 
orthodoxy, gains their confidence, and slowly works to 
educate them. Like this tale, the Six of Pentacles indicates the 
manner in which religion, and also esoteric teachings, give 
what we are capable of receiving. Waite, in describing this 
card, says ‘a person in the guise of a merchant’ - not a 
merchant, but a person ‘in the guise’ of one. And Nietzsche, in 
Thus Spake Zjarathustra, has a hermit tell Zarathustra, ‘If you 
want to go to them, give no more than an aim, and let them 
beg for that. ’ Give more and no one wilJ listen. 

Yet who is this person in his merchant ‘guise? Is he simply 
a teacher, or a religious or psychological doctrine? The scales 
suggest something more - Justice, which stands for truth, not 
just as ‘correct information’ but as a living force holding 
together and balancing the universe. In the Ten of Pentacles 
we saw this force as the old man at the gate; here we see it as 
the merchant. Life gives us what we need, what we can use. 
Especially when we put ourselves in a position to receive. 

People who work with meditation or the Tarot or similar 
disciplines (as well as people doing artistic work) often notice 
a curious phenomenon. Life appears to conspire to give them 
what they need to help them on their way. Not a great burst, 
but just enough to give them a little push when they can most 
use it. Here is an example. At the time when I was working 
with these meanings for the Six of Pentacles I did a Tarot 
reading for myself in which the Six came up crossing the 
Knight of Cups. I took this to mean that by keeping a medita¬ 
tive frame of mind I would receive benefit. Now, this occurred 
some months after my mother's death, and while visiting my 



112 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


father 1 found and began to wear a mezuzah (a kind of Jewish 
amulet) of my mother’s. 1'he mezuzah was inscribed with the 
name ‘Shaddai’. I recognized this word as a name of God, but 
did not know what it meant. Two or three days after the 
reading I went with my father to a synagogue for the Saturday 
prayers (something I would not have done on my own). On 
the way in I saw the name Shaddai on some jewellery on 
display, and mentioned my curiosity about its meaning. 

When I looked at the Bible reading for that day 1 discovered 
a note explaining the meaning of Shaddai. Translated as 
‘Almighty’ it comes from a Hebrew root meaning ‘to over¬ 
power’. But it relates also to an Arabic word meaning 
‘benevolence, giving of gifts’. Not only did the book answer my 
immediate question, but it gave me a greater understanding of 
the Six of Pentacles. The ‘merchant’ symbolizes the force of 
life, which not only gives us what we need and can receive, but 
can also overpower us (yet ordinarily does not if we do not 
wish it) with spiritual wonder. And I had gained these insights 
(which, because I experienced them, meant more to me than 
they would have as intellectual ideas) by literally putting 
myself in a position to receive, that is, by going with my father 
to the synagogue. 

From the Six of Pentacles we learn that the value of 
studying the Tarot or other disciplines lies not simply in the 
specific knowledge gained but also in the frame of mind 
created by the act of doing it. The work itself changes us. We 
can develop these changes consciously and deliberately 
through the mechanism of the Gate cards. By contemplating 
and joining their pictures we allow ourselves to receive their 
gifts. 

REVERSED 

The possible meanings relate to the meanings right side up. A 
lack of generosity, selfishness when sharing is expected. Some¬ 
times this refers to a situation where the person is in a superior 
position. Then the giver is challenged to give more freely, not 
to measure out what he or she can afford, but really to share. 
At other times the card will point up the resentment of those 
people receiving charity, or its emotional counterpart, pity. 

Often the Six reversed indicates that some stable, but 
basically unequal or unsatisfying, situation has been disrup¬ 
ted. Whether or not this disruption results in a freer or more 


t 



PENTACLES 


113 


equal situation will depend on various factors, not least of 
which is the desire and courage of the people involved to 
continue a process which they, or some outside agency, have 
started. 

Finally, of course, it means not putting ourselves in a 
position to receive; either cutting ourselves off spiritually, or 
missing some practical opportunity, perhaps through 
arrogance or suspicion of other people's motives. 



(a) Figure 52 (b) 

FIVE 

The various meanings for this card illustrate again that 
problem of certitude discussed in the section on Readings. 
How can we know for sure which meaning will apply in a real 
situation? At the same time the meanings show the way in 
which a situation can turn in very different directions. 

The Fives illustrate conflict and loss of some kind; in terms 
of Pentacles this means first of all material troubles, such as 
poverty or illness. Sometimes it implies a longstanding 
hardship. Observe that the people, though bent and crippled, 
are surviving. This card may indicate love, especially that of 
two people holding together in a bad situation. It may turn 
out that hardship has become one of the major factors keeping 
them together, so that relief from their material troubles may 
strain their unity - or they may think this will happen and 






114 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

therefore fear change. 

Notice that they are passing a church. Now, as a place of 
sanctuary, the church represents rest and relief from the 
storm. The people, however, do not see it. Human beings can 
get used to anything, and when they do they will often not see 
opportunities for change; they will even resist an end to their 
problems. If we compare these people with the kneeling 
beggars of Six we see that Five represents pride and indepen¬ 
dence, sometimes to a foolish degree when help is genuinely 
offered. 

As we examine the card more closely we can discover 
alternative, even opposed, meanings. The card shows no door 
to the church. As with many real churches today, which lock 
their doors like businesses at 5 pm, this church has perhaps 
shut the people out. The sanctuary has failed. We see first of 
all a comment on modern religion, which many feel has failed 
in the task of giving comfort and healing to people’s troubled 
souls. On a simpler level, in many countries the churches have 
grown rich at the people’s expense. Again, compare the Five 
with the Six. The merchant there may symbolize the modern 
secular church, giving what material assistance it can (or 
will), while the people’s spiritual needs go unattended. 

We can call the previous paragraph the ‘sociological’ 
interpretation of the doorless church. If we shift the emphasis 
to the people we can see a psychological view. Sometimes we 
may find ourselves in a situation where outside forces - social 
institutions, family, friends, etc. - cannot help us and we must 
struggle against the problems on our own. 

We can extend this idea to a ‘magic’ or occult interpreta¬ 
tion. In Part One of this book I discussed how the magician, 
by setting out on a course of personal development, pits him or 
herself against the established Church, which traditionally 
acts as an intermediary between human beings and God. The 
choice may bring practical as well as political consequences. If 
the magician encounters dangerous psychic forces, then 
traditional religion cannot (let alone will not) help him or her 
overcome them. Compare the Five of Pentacles with the 
Hierophant, number 5 in the Major Arcana. There two 
supplicants submit to a doctrine that guides them in all situa¬ 
tions. Here the people have rejected such doctrines, or have 
simply found them irrelevant. 



PENTAGLES 


IIS 


REVERSED 

Waite gives the meaning ‘chaos, disorder, ruin, confusion'. 
This suggests that the situation right side up has collapsed. 
The people are no longer surviving. While the immediate 
situation may seem much worse it can sometimes lead to 
improvement. When people accustom themselves to suffering, 
a collapse may release them. Whether they now can build 
something more positive depends partly on themselves and 
partly on the influence and opportunities around them. 



Figure .5.} 

FOUR 

We see first of all the image of a miser, and by extension, 
dependence on material comforts and security for the stability 
symbolized by the number Four. As if in response to the 
troubles shown on the previous card the man has given himself 
a protective layer against any economic (or other) problems 
that might arise in the future. However, while the Five showed 
two people, here we see one person, excluding others through 
his need for personal security. 

As magic signs the pentacles symbolize basic emotional/ 
psychic energy. The man here uses his pentacles to close 
himself off from the outside world. He has covered his most 
vital points: the crown of the head (literally a crown here), the 
heart and throat, and the soles of the feet. People working with 




116 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF W1S1K)M 


chakra meditation will recognize the first two as vital points of 
connection to Spirit, and to other people. Covering the feet 
symbolizes blocking ourselves off from the world around us. 
The man cannot, however, seal his back. We always remain 
vulnerable to life, no matter how self-centred we fry to make 
ourselves. 

In certain situations, the Four, usually viewed as a 
‘problem' card, becomes very appropriate. When life has 
broken down into chaos, then the Four indicates creating a 
structure, either through material things, or by turning 
emotional and mental energy inwards. The card remains an 
image of selfishness but sometimes selfishness may be pre¬ 
cisely what is needed. People who meditate through their 
auras will usually, at the end of each meditation, follow a 
ritual of‘sealing' the aura at the chakra points. This practice 
prevents both a leaking of their own energy and a Hooding of 
the self by outside influences. 

Finally, on a very deep level, the Four of Pentacles sym¬ 
bolizes the way in which the human mind gives structure and 
meaning to the chaos of the material universe. This idea does 
not contradict the concept of forces balancing nature, as 
described in Ten and Six. Rather it adds to that idea, by 
showing that the mind not only perceives, but actually helps 
those forces to function. The fact that human beings exist in 
the universe as creators rather than as passive observers forms 
one of the meeting points between mystical/esoteric teachings 
and contemporary physics. 

REVERSED 

Here the energy becomes released. The act can signify 
generosity and freedom - if right side up indicates greed or 
confinement within ourselves - but it can also represent the 
inability to hold our life together, to give it structure. Once 
again, in an actual situation the meaning depends on other 
influences. 



PENTACLES 


117 



Figure :if 

THREE 

We return here to the theme of work, seen both in its literal 
sense and as a symbol of spiritual development. The man on 
the left is a sculptor, a master of his art. The card sometimes 
appears in connection with the Eight of Pentacles, signifying 
that the hard work and dedication have resulted or will result 
in mastery. 

To the right stand a monk and an architect holding the 
plans of the church. Together the three figures signify that the 
best w'ork combines both technical skill (Air) and spiritual 
understanding (Water) with energy and desire (Fire). 
Observe how the pentacles form an upward pointing Fire 
triangle, showing that work can raise us to higher levels, while 
below them a flower sits within a downward pointing Water 
triangle, symbolizing the need to root such work in the reality 
of the world and the needs of the community. Reflecting this 
duality the card, like the Nine, refers to actual work yet may 
also stand as a symbol of the developed self. These two 
meanings do not cancel each other out. As observed earlier, 
practical work, done consciously and with commitment, may 
serve as the vehicle for self-development. 

Fart of this card's meaning lies in the fact that such sym¬ 
bolism of psychic development should occur in mundane 
Pentacles, rather than the often more exotic images of the 
other suits. 




118 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


REVERSED 

Mediocrity: the work, physical or spiritual, goes badly, often 
from laziness or weakness. Sometimes the meaning extends to 
a general situation in which little happens; things continue, 
either getting worse or improving, at a slow steady rate. 



Figure 55 

TWO 

Like the Two of Swords the Two of Pentacles strikes a pre¬ 
carious balance, though in general a happier one. We see, in 
fact, the very concept of balance in the image of the juggler. At 
times the card means juggling life itself, keeping everything in 
the air at once. More simply, it carries the idea of enjoying life, 
having a good time - similar to the Nine of Cups, but lighter, a 
dance more than a feast. 

Like so many Pentacles, the card implies a hidden magic in 
its ordinary pleasures. The juggler holds his magic emblems 
within a loop or ribbon shaped like an infinity sign, the same 
sign which appears above the head of the Magician, and the 
woman in Strength. Some people believe that spiritual 
development occurs only in serious moments. Pleasure and 
amusement can also teach us a great deal, as long as we pay- 
attention. 




PENTACLES 


119 


REVERSED 

Here the game becomes forced: Waite says ‘simulated enjoy¬ 
ment'. Faced either with some problem we do not wish to face, 
or else with social pressure not to make a fuss, we may pretend 
to ourselves as well as to others, to take everything lightly. The 
juggling act is likely to fail. 



Figure 56 

ACE 

The gift of the Earth: nature, wealth, security, a joyful life. On 
this Ace alone we see no Yods falling from heaven. The Earth, 
in its completeness and solid reality, bears its own magic. 

We have seen with the other cards (primarily the Ten) how 
the magic will often remain hidden from us simply because we 
see its products as so ordinary. Here the hand gives its gifts in 
a garden, a place sheltered from the wilderness seen beyond it. 
Civilization, when it works well, gives us this basic protection. 
Through the work of civilization humanity shapes the raw 
material of nature into a safe and comfortable environment. 

Spiritual work leads us to recognize the magic in normal 
things, in both nature and civilization, and then to go beyond 
them to the greater knowledge symbolized by the mountains. 
The exit from the garden forms an arch very similar to the 
wreath of victory surrounding the World Dancer. As the 
Minor Arcana comes to an end the Ace of Pentacles shows us 



120 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


once more how, when we are ready, the Gate always opens to 
the truth. 

REVERSED 

Because material gifts exist in a way that the gifts of the other 
Aces do not, they are more open to abuse. The Ace of 
Pentacles reversed can signify all the ways in which wealth 
corrupts people - selfishness, extreme competition, mistrust, 
overdependence on security and comfort. 

Taken another way the garden can sometimes stand for 
protection, either by events or other people, from the problems 
of life. Reversed then indicates that this protection has ended, 
and that the person must deal with her or his problems; or 
that the person wishes to hang on to this shelter after the time 
has come to leave it. Like the Hermit reversed, it can sym¬ 
bolize a refusal to grow up - specifically, to become indepen¬ 
dent of our parents. 

At other times, however, the Ace reversed can mean 
recognizing (as with the Eight of Cups) that the time has come 
to leave the familiar behind and travel through the Gate to the 
mountains of wisdom. 



READINGS 





Chapter 5 . 

Introduction to 
Tarot Divination 


The use of Tarot cards for doing readings - ‘divination’, to 
give the practice its proper name - has been controversial for 
at least as long as the occult, ‘serious’ study of the cards began 
in the eighteenth century. Paradoxically, while many 
occultists will sneer at divination, most people know of no 
other purpose for Tarot. 

Fairly early in their history, Tarot cards came into the 
hands of the Romany, or ‘gypsies', probably when they 
entered Spain from North Africa (the cards apparently came 
to Spain from Italy or France). The Romany have given us no 
information on any private or secret use they might have made 
of the cards. Publicly, of course, they used them to make 
money telling fortunes - for the rich in private chambers 
where no one could learn their secrets, for the poor in tents 
and caravans at fairs and festivals. 

Many people today still believe the Romany invented 
Tarot, despite clear evidence to the contrary. The connection 
between the two remains so strong that many women wishing 
to read professionally will dress in bright scarves and flounc¬ 
ing skirts and gold earrings (balloon pants and brocaded vests 
and one earring for men) and take names like ‘Madam 
Sosostris’ in order to satisfy the public. 

The long association of Tarot reading with cheap 
theatricals probably explains, at least in part, the contempt or 
lack of interest many Tarot students have shown towards 
divination. Seeing the Tarot as both a diagram and a tool of 
conscious evolution, occultists and esotericists will 
automatically dismiss the use of the cards to usher in ‘tall dark 
strangers’ or mysterious inheritances. And yet, by seeing only 
the abuse and not the deeper possibilities in readings, these 



124 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


occultists have themselves limited the Tarot's true value. 

Here is Arthur Edward Waite commenting on divination in 
his book The Pictorial Key to the Tarot: ‘The allocation of a 
fortune-telling aspect to these cards is the story of a prolonged 
impertinence.’ This brings us to an interesting paradox. 
Because they looked down on fortune-telling, Waite and 
others have extended the misuse of readings. The derogatory- 
way in which they wrote about it has fixed in many people’s 
minds the image of trivial attempts to predict the future. As to 
why they wrote of it at all, we can only guess that they or their 
publishers assumed the public demanded such an approach. 
After all, even today most people who pick up a book on Tarot 
care more about mysterious messages than they do about 
achieving psychic transformation. Certainly the best-selling 
Tarot books give the simplest formulas for the cards' 
meanings - and at the same time promise all knowledge. 

More important than why they bothered to write about it is 
the simple fact that few esotericists have done much to dispel 
the image of divination as trivial. This disregard has even 
extended to the entire Minor Arcana. Because the Minor 
cards are associated with readings many serious books on 
Tarot treat them very lightly, if at all (White's remark applied 
only to the Major cards). Paul Foster Case's book The Tarot 
gives only the barest formulas in a kind of appendix at the 
back. Many others treat only the Major cards. Almost alone of 
modern esoteric studies Crowley’s The Book Of Thoth goes 
deeply into the Minor cards, linking them to a complex 
astrological system. 

As for methods of doing readings, the most important 
esoteric studies have given only the barest information, a few 
‘spreads’ or designs for laying out the cards, with formula 
explanations for the different positions. Again, Crowley is the 
exception, presenting a characteristically complicated system 
of readings via an astrological ‘clock'. 

The impact of depth psychology and humanistic astrology 
has led many contemporary writers to seek a more serious use 
of divination. Unfortunately, by treating readings in such an 
offhand manner, the earlier writers have created a tradition of 
formulas which modern writers have found hard to shake off. 
Thus we still find the same sorts of explanations for the Minor 
cards, such as ‘All is not yet lost; good fortune is still possible’ 
(Douglas); and the same brief descriptions of spreads, with 



INTRODUCTION TO TAROT DIVINATION 


125 


explanations such as ‘best possible outcome’ for the positions. 
Following Crowley and others, several contemporary books 
have attempted to widen the meaning of the cards by linking 
them not only to astrology and the Qabalah but to the 1 
Ching, Jungian psychology, Tantra, even Central American 
mythology. Such linking aids understanding, particularly for 
those people with a previous knowledge of the other system (it 
would be interesting to see a book about, say, gestalt psy¬ 
chology which explains its subject in terms of Tarot 
correspondence rather than the other way round). Still, the 
emphasis for any careful study of Tarot must remain with the 
cards themselves, and with their use in meditation and in 
readings. This section of the book hopes to give at least a sense 
of just how complex and deeply instructive a tool Tarot 
divination can be. 


COMMON SENSE 

Many people say that Tarot readings ‘scare’ them. What they 
mean by this is first a discomfort that anything should expose 
their experiences, as well as their inner fears and their hopes; 
and second, that a pack of cards should do so. They may 
approach the Tarot first as a game, especially if a friend or 
relative lays the cards so that they do not have to pay for the 
reading. They mix the cards, grinning a little, for they feel 
foolish; the reader lays them out, perhaps looking up the 
meanings in a book, and amazingly, out comes the new job, or 
the unfaithful lover or, if the reader approaches it a little more 
subtly, perhaps the fear of illness or a painful rebellion against 
a parent. ‘You’re making that up from what you know about 
me,’ they say, or ‘You could tell all that from looking at me, 
couldn’t you? You didn’t really get that from the cards.' And 
then the next time someone suggests laying out the cards they 
laugh and say, ‘No thanks, that stuff scares me.' 

The fact is, the future does scare most people. They do not 
expect anything good to happen. They will settle for things 
staying the same - a balance of pain and happiness with a 
large measure of boredom, frustration, and low-level misery; 
but even such stability appears unlikely. In most people's eyes 
things can only get worse, and probably will. 

Tarot readings teach us many things beyond the particular 
information we get from them. One of these is the pre- 



126 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


dominance of pessimism. If a person’s cards all come out 
positive, glowing with promised happiness, the person will 
probably say, ‘Oh yes? I'll believe it when 1 see it.’ But if just 
one card hints at trouble or illness the response changes to ‘I 
knew it, I knew it. What am I going to do?’ With such an 
attitude, imagine how the fear, and perhaps resentment, rises 
when the dread information comes to them from a pack of 
cards. 

There is another side to this question of accepting the cards. 
People who go to Tarot readers often do so with a ‘show-me’ 
attitude. Since they look at divination as something ‘magical’ 
(though not really knowing what that means) they want the 
reader to demonstrate magical powers. The value of the 
reading for them lies in how accurately it matches what they 
know to be true about their lives, plus, of course, a bit of fresh 
information. To make sure the reader is ‘honest’, they conceal 
as much of their lives as possible. I remember one woman w ho 
came for advice about her work. Throughout the reading she 
stared blankly at me or the cards, giving me no indications at 
all if what I said meant anything to her. Afterwards, however, 
she went over every card, explaining how it related directly to 
her current experience. 

Another time I had promised to do a Tree of Life reading 
(see below) for a friend as a present for her twenty-first 
birthday. When she told someone at work she was going to 
have her cards read the woman said, alarmed, ‘Oh, you 
mustn’t do that. You don't know what these people do. 1’hey 
go down to the city hall and look up everything about you, 
where you were born, where you live ...' My friend didn’t tell 
the woman I already knew all these things. 

It does not seem to occur to such people that they have 
wasted their time and money if they only learn things they 
already know, along with a smattering of new facts. They 
seem to forget that they have not come to test the reader but to 
get advice. How much more the woman could have learned 
about her career if she had given me the opportunity to go 
deeper into the relationships between the cards instead of just 
seeing how close I came to the facts. 

Behind the fear and the scepticism lies the same problem: 
Tarot cards offend ‘common sense’, that is, the image of the 
world we hold in common, w'hich is usually the image taught 
to us by society. We can call this image ‘scientific’, though 



INTRODUCTION TO TAROT DIVINATION 


127 


only in the strict historical sense of that word as meaning the 
view propagated by officially recognized scientists (excluding, 
for instance, astrologers and yogis) since the seventeenth 
century. Ironically, the natural sciences themselves, par¬ 
ticularly physics, are moving away from a strict mechanistic 
universe. However, culture lag ensures that most people still 
think of science in nineteenth-century terms. 

Thus, the ‘common sense" view of the world that arose in 
one culture - Europe - has held sway for no more than two or 
three hundred years, and has already started to fade. We 
cannot deny the achievements of this view, whatever its short¬ 
comings. Most people who denounce science cannot offer any 
replacement other than nostalgia for a romanticized past that 
never existed. The danger which humanity now presents to 
nature ironically testifies to the extent to which humanity has 
overcome the great threats - starvation, wild beasts, disease, 
etc. - that nature once presented to humanity. But accepting 
science’s achievements does not require us to banish all other 
contributions to human knowledge. 

Modern Western science began as a consciously ideological 
movement, deliberately opposing the religious world-view of 
its time. Its early practitioners and theoreticians, such as 
Francis Bacon, saw themselves as revolutionaries, proposing a 
whole new relation to nature, one that would do more than 
increase knowledge. Science, they preached, would create a 
new world. Even today, the institution of science retains a 
dogmatic evangelist character. The fame and popularity of 
Immanuel Velikovsky derived, at least in part, from the 
hysterical attacks on him by scientists (in Holland, land of 
tolerance, scientists attempted to get the government to ban 
Velikovsky’s books). And witness the organization recently 
formed by Carl Sagan, Isaac Asimov, and others for the 
purpose of attacking the popularity of astrology. 

Interestingly, while traditional science’s reputation has 
fallen on hard times its view of the world remains mostly 
unchallenged. With some justification and some confusion 
people blame scientists for the various threats facing life on 
earth. And yet ‘common sense’ still means the world as 
created by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century science. Such 
is the power of conditioning. 

How then do we characterize this ‘common" (shared, 
ordinary) sense? Primarily it insists that only one kind of 



128 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


relationship can exist between events, objects, or patterns. 
This is the relationship of direct physical cause. If 1 push 
something it falls over. That makes sense. Does it make sense 
if I think about something and it falls over? Or if I push a toy 
model of it and it falls over? 

The common-sense person says no, if events turn out that 
way it is coincidence, a word meaning that two or more things 
have a relationship in time; they have coincided, but have no 
other relationship. Causality remains restricted to observable 
physical action. 

But science, even in its most mechanistic period during the 
last two centuries, had to extend this concept to dubious limits 
in order to explain the observable world. The earth and the 
other planets move around the sun. This is a demonstrable 
fact. We can calculate the mathematical relationships of these 
moving bodies to such a degree that we can discover new 
bodies by an irregular movement in those already known 
(Neptune and Pluto were discovered this way). But the facts 
do not explain how this happens. No giant hands push or pull 
the earth around the sun. Yet the regularity of the movement 
prevents us calling it coincidence. Therefore, scientists 
invented such concepts as ‘natural laws' and ‘force fields’. The 
same person who will say that it ‘makes no sense’ for someone 
to knock over a chair by thinking about it will find it perfectly 
sensible that ‘gravity ’ makes the earth go round the sun. 

What then of the earlier view - that of ‘correspondence’, 
where the relationship between objects and events is that of 
similarity? Here it does ‘make sense’ that someone can knock 
over a chair by knocking over a toy model of it. And it makes 
sense that the position of the planets at the time of birth 
should influence personality. 

Actually, both these views exist side by side today, though 
the correspondence view remains less respectable. Certain 
plants resemble human organs. Various people (particularly 
‘new age’ or alternative healers) will claim that it makes sense 
that these plants should help keep those organs healthy. Other 
people will say it makes sense that the two things have nothing 
to do with each other. The ‘sense’ of the two groups is not 
common at all. 

Despite this uncommonness, the tw f o views will sometimes 
overlap. People who wish to justify astrology to the majority 
often invoke the ‘law’ of gravity to explain the astrological 



INTRODUCTION TO TAROT DIVINATION 


129 


influences, despite the fact that the kind of influence that each 
planet is said to exert depends largely on the mythological 
associations assigned to that planet by ancient civilizations. 

Suppose we accept the earlier common sense; does that help 
us accept the observable fact that Tarot readings accurately 
reflect a person’s life? We do interpret them according to 
correspondences - the pattern of the shuffled cards reflects the 
pattern of events. Nevertheless, for many Firm believers in the 
sense of astrology the Tarot still offends. The planets form a 
fixed and specific pattern at the moment of birth, one deter¬ 
mined all the way back to creation when gravity slotted them 
into their predictable orbits. But shuffled cards carry no such 
determination. Besides, the planets are mighty beings, pon¬ 
derously moving through the sky. Cards can appear so trivial. 
How can we accept them? 

For many people, the authority of astrology derives from the 
vastness of the cosmos and ultimately from God. It makes 
‘sense’ that something so small as a human being should 
receive its personality from the vast movements of the planets. 
And even if it might embarrass people to say so, we know who 
set those planets and stars in motion in the first place. But 
only people shuffle cards. And if they shuffle them again, why, 
they get a new pattern. So how could the first possess any 
serious meaning? 

Behind this last question lies a very important assumption: 
that only fixed patterns are real. The fact is, the correspon¬ 
dence world-view can tend to mechanistic attitudes as much 
as the natural law view does. Both beg the question of God, or 
first causes. Just as neither explains how the mechanism came 
into being, the natural laws or the patterns of the zodiac, so 
neither really requires us to worry about it. God may have set 
it all in motion, but now it works by itself. Though a good 
astrologer uses intuition to interpret a horoscope, the chart 
itself can be constructed by anyone with a little training. 

The Tarot, however, is dynamic rather than determinist. 
No fixed rule governs how a person will shuffle the cards. And 
they can always be shuffled again. (I have done as many as six 
readings on a question and had basically the same answer 
every time, though with important variations, with many of 
the same cards appearing in every reading. The observation 
that something works, however, does not explain hnw it 
works.) 



130 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


In the 1930s Carl Jung and Wolfgang Pauli decided to 
study ‘meaningful coincidence’. Jung became interested in the 
subject through astrology and experiments with the I Ching - 
which frightened him in much the same way the Tarot fright¬ 
ens most people. Pauli took up the subject from a more 
personal involvement; coincidences seemed to follow him like 
a faithful, and often clumsy, dog. 

Their investigations did not really go much beyond the 
stage of proclaiming that such coincidences exist and some 
sort of principle must lie behind them. They did, however, add 
a new word to the world’s languages: synchronicity. Events 
are synchronous when no observable cause connects them and 
yet a meaning exists between them. For instance, if we need to 
consult a certain rare book, and without any knowledge of this 
need someone comes to our house carrying a copy of this book, 
we call this conjunction synchronous. 

People often use the word ‘synchronicity’ as a charm 
against the philosophic difficulties of events which have no 
apparent cause. When something seemingly impossible 
happens we say, ‘It’s synchronicity' and escape the assault on 
common sense. Jung and Pauli, of course, saw the term as 
something more than that. They were trying to suggest that 
an ‘acausal principle’ could connect events as surely as the 
causal ones of natural laws. In other words, if we bring bits of 
information together in a random way, free from the causal 
connections of conscious direction, then the acausal syn¬ 
chronicity will bring them together in a meaningful way. This 
is, of course, what happens in divination. The important thing 
to notice here is that the synchronous principle can only take 
over if we first remove the causal one. In other words - any 
method of producing random patterns - shuffling cards, 
throwing coins - is necessary to give the principle a chance to 
work. 

In a way, divination really derives from a world-view older 
even than that of correspondences. We can call this view 
‘archaic’ and describe it as one in which God or the gods are 
present at all times, taking an active part in destiny and the 
running of the universe. In such a world nothing happens 
because of any laws, but rather because God chooses to make 
it happen. Thus, not gravity but the Great Mother causes 
spring to follow winter. And she may just as well choose not to 
make it happen. 


INTRODUCTION TO TAROT DIVINATION 


131 

For people who held this view, communication with the 
gods was not only possible but necessary. Not only did they 
want to keep the gods happy, or at least not angry, but it 
helped if they had some idea of what the gods intended. 
People who could not depend on the predictability of natural 
laws, or the measured movements of the planets, had to ask. 

They could communicate with the gods in two ways. First, 
it was (and is) possible to go into a trance and visit the gods in 
their celestial retreats, as the great shamans have always done. 
More easily, and less dangerously, they could let the gods 
speak through code, that is, divination, using dice, entrails, 
bird patterns, yarrow sticks, cards. 

But why should these random patterns constitute God’s 
speech? As with synchronicity the answer is because they are 
random, because they do offend rational common sense; they 
bypass the ordinary moment-by-moment way in which people 
experience life. Like dreams, they step outside the normal 
logic-bound language of conscious humanity. And by stepping 
outside it, they transcend it. 

In this archaic view God is present in all things, all events. 
God speaks to us all the time. Our limited perception, 
however, prevents us from sensing this communication. It is 
just as well this limitation exists. As the three rabbis who 
entered Paradise with Rabbi Akiba learned, God’s speech 
overwhelms, blinds. In fact, as we saw in Part One of this 
book, the veil of ego exists not only as a cumbersome limita¬ 
tion but as a saving mercy from the true power of the universe. 
The purpose of esoteric training is not simply to remove the 
veil, but rather to train the self to make proper use of the light¬ 
ning flash of God’s speech. Nevertheless, if as ordinary people 
we want some information from God - that is, from beyond 
our own limited perceptions - we need a way to see round the 
blinkers which cut us off from the world of Truth. We need to 
produce synchronicity. 

Any device which produces a ‘random’ pattern will serve 
this function. It is possible that all the gimmicks people use for 
gambling originally served for divination, and for the same 
reason. Dice and mixed cards and spinning wheels all cut 
through the conscious mind's control of the outcome. 

Identifying some of the Tarot’s ancient roots (I am not 
suggesting the Tarot itself goes back to ancient times, only 
that the concepts behind its working do) does not explain it to 



132 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


modern minds. However, certain aspects of the archaic world¬ 
view have begun to return, suitably clothed in the modern ter¬ 
minology of physics and depth psychology rather than the 
mythological language of gods and goddesses. ‘Synchronicity' 
is one such term. 

Modern quantum theory suggests that on the most basic- 
level existence does not follow any rules or determined laws. 
Particles interact at random, and what we observe as natural 
laws are actually aggregates of probability giving the 
appearance of determinism, something like the way a coin 
flipped enough times will come out to an equal number of 
heads and tails, so that someone might think a ‘law’ of balance 
required even distribution. (Indeed, many people believe the 
‘law of averages' can order the outcome of some particular 
event - ‘You’ve failed every other time, the law of averages 
says you’ve got to make it this time' - when the whole point of 
probability is just the opposite, that it cannot predict specific 
events.) 

At the same time that physics is eating away at the universe 
of fixed laws, so modern psychology (or at least some branches 
of it) has begun to look at non-rational theories of knowledge. 
Where archaic people spoke of the ‘other worlds' or the ‘land 
of the gods’, today we speak of the ‘unconscious'. The terms 
change but the underlying experience remains: a realm of 
being in which time does not exist and knowledge is not 
limited to the images received from our senses. And the 
methods used to ‘contact the unconscious' have not changed 
from those employed to listen to the gods thousands of years 
ago - dreams, trances (of which Freudian free association is a 
kind of lesser version), tossed coins. 

We come to the notion that the Tarot works precisely 
because it makes no sense. The information exists. Our 
unconscious selves already know it. What we need is a device 
to act as a bridge to conscious perception. 

As pointed out earlier, reaching this level of connection, this 
synchronicity of uncommon sense, does not depend on what 
system we use. The Tarot, the I Ching, dice, tea leaves, all 
really serve the same function. They produce random infor¬ 
mation. Perhaps in the future more ‘modern' ways of produc¬ 
ing random patterns will emerge. Most ‘pure' might be a 
system of divination based on the movements and energy 
jumps of sub-atomic particles. For it is at this most basic level 




INTRODUCTION TO TAROT DIVINATION 


133 


that we can see the most important implication of syn- 
chronicity, that existence does not follow rigid determinist laws 
in which all events arise from fixed causes. And yet at the 
same time, events have meaning. Or rather, meaning emerges 
from events. From all the random darting and spinning of par¬ 
ticles emerges solid matter. From the separate actions and 
experiences of a person’s life emerges a personality. From the 
mixing of Tarot cards emerges awareness. 

If any device will provide meaning, why Tarot? The answer 
is, any system will tell us something, but the quality of that 
something depends on the values contained in the system. The 
Tarot contains a philosophy, an outline of how human con¬ 
sciousness evolves, and a vast compendium of human 
experience. Shuffling the cards brings all these values into 
play with each other. 

We might argue that assigning a philosophy to the cards 
destroys their objectivity in terms of predicting events. Human 
values and interpretations have intruded in an otherwise.pure 
system. Such an idea, I think, would come from a misunder¬ 
standing of ‘objectivity’. The Tarot is objective because it 
bypasses conscious decision, but it is not impartial. On the 
contrary, it attempts to push us in certain directions: 
optimism, spirituality, a belief in the necessity and value of 
change. 

The meanings for the cards given in this book leave a good 
deal of room for interpretation by the reader. In fact, they 
require it. This is because the practised reader brings far more 
to her or his work than a detailed knowledge of the cards and 
their traditional meanings. Just as important is sensitivity - 
both to the pictures and to the person sitting there nervously 
and excitedly staring at the cards. A good reader does not 
simply repeat traditional fixed meanings. Rather, he or she 
will find new meanings and interpretations, will extend the 
patterns. 

While some people desire objective readings and dislike 
interpretation, others argue that a reader should not use any 
definite meanings at all, but always work from ‘feeling' the 
pictures at the moment. Yet to do so will limit the reader to 
the narrow range of his or her own perceptions. And those 
perceptions will always come at least partly from his or her 
own experiences and cultural conditioning. Very few people 
have reached a level of awareness where they can escape the 



134 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


bias of their own history. For most of us, our emotions cloud 
our intuition. The subconscious gets in the way of the uncon¬ 
scious. (See the footnote on page 157, for the difference 
between ‘unconscious’and ‘subconscious’.) 

A reader who trusts feelings can be led away from the truth 
as well as towards it. But there is another reason why we 
should work with the traditional meanings belonging to the 
images. If we do not use the wisdom others have put into the 
cards, then we deprive ourselves of their knowledge and 
experience. Therefore, part of a reader’s training lies in simply 
studying the cards, while another part lies in gaining a 
personal sense of them through practice, meditation, and 
creative work. 

Tarot readings teach us many things. One of the most 
valuable is this necessary balance of objective and subjective, 
action and intuition. Recently experimental science has 
‘discovered’ that the two halves of the brain do not perform 
the same functions; the left hemisphere (governing the right 
side of the body) deals with rational and linear activities, 
while the right hemisphere (governing the left side of the 
body) deals with intuitive, creative, and holistic activities. 
(Left-handed people would appear to function the other way 
round, the right side governing intuition, the left rationality.) 
This ‘discovery’ is reminiscent of the argument about whether 
Columbus, Leif Ericson, or St Brendan discovered America. 
Just as the Indians had lived there for thousands of years, so 
esotericists had known about the split brain for centuries. 

When a person has mixed the Tarot cards the reader, if 
right-handed, picks them up in the left hand, then lays them 
down with the right. We do this to give just a little more 
emphasis on that necessary combination of intuition and con¬ 
scious knowledge. The left hand helps channel sensitivity but 
we turn the cards with the right because we want the rational 
brain to explain the pattern intuitively. 

In Part One of this book I wrote that readings partake of 
both the Magician and the High Priestess principles, con¬ 
sciousness and intuition. We can go further and say that doing 
Tarot readings helps achieve a balance and unity of these 
principles in their practical states, that of will and openness. 
Each time we do a reading we assert our will to impose a 
meaning on the patterns thrown out by chaos. The act 
suggests not only the Magician (number 1) but the Wheel of 


INTRODUCTION TO TAROT DIVINA TION 


135 


Fortune (number 10). The latter card carries a vision of the 
world in time (remember the Wirth version of the Wheel as 
resting in a boat - consciousness - floating on the sea of 
existence). However, meaning imposed by consciousness 
carries true value only if we open ourselves to the pictures and 
the impact they make on us. Therefore, Tarot readings 
suggest the High Priestess (number 2), but also the Hanged 
Man (number 12), the image of such a close connection to life 
that we no longer see ourselves as separate or opposed to it. 
And the card that connects trumps 10 and 12 can also stand 
for the emblem of Tarot readings themselves: Justice, her 
scales forever balanced not by a careful weighing of opposites 
- so much intuition for so much objective knowledge - but by 
a living commitment to the truth. 


138 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Chinese people Pentacles, most Swedes Wands, and so on. 

A more objective system uses astrological signs. As 
described earlier, the four elements signify signs of the zodiac, 
as well as the suits of Tarot. Most people know their own sun 
signs and if not the reader can readily determine it from the 
birthday. Of course, most astrologers say that the sun sign 
constitutes only one twelfth of the person’s chart and another 
element may dominate. 

In my work I find it worthwhile to increase the subject’s 
involvement by letting him or her choose the suit. After I have 
decided the level (Queen, King, Knight or Page) I remove the 
four appropriate cards from the deck and place them before 
the person. If the person knows some Tarot symbolism I ask 
her or him to disregard formal attributes and choose simply 
by reaction to the pictures. 

Usually we do not interpret this ‘Significator’ card. It 
stands for the whole person rather than whatever aspects 
belong to that card. In some situations, however, the choice 
becomes important. Suppose a married woman chooses the 
Queen of Cups to represent herself; if the King of Cups comes 
up in the reading it may represent her husband, or more pre¬ 
cisely, since the reading looks at the situation from the quer¬ 
ent’s point of view, her husband’s influence on her. If the 
husband tends towards immaturity and/or dependence on the 
woman, then the Knight may appear instead of the King. 

Other cards of the same suit may also stand for the subject 
rather than someone else. If the subject chooses the King of 
Wands to represent himself, then the appearance of the Queen 
may indicate the emergence of a more ‘female’ side of 
appreciation and receptivity. If the querent is a Knight, then 
the appearance of the King or Queen may represent 
immaturity, or regression, or a more youthful attitude. 

We can call these changes ‘vertical’ - moving up and down 
in the same suit. ‘Horizontal’ changes are the appearance of 
one or more cards at the same level but from different suits. If 
the person chooses the Queen of Swords, then the Queen of 
Cups appearing in the reading may indicate a change in the 
person. These ‘transmutations’as I call them often carry great 
meaning. 

The question of how to interpret court cards - as someone 
else or as an aspect of the subject - remains for most people 
one of the most difficult elements of Tarot reading. Usually it 




TYPES OF READINGS 


139 


takes experience and a strong feeling for the cards to help 
indicate the correct interpretation. Even very practised 
readers will often find the alternatives confusing. 

After the choice of Significator comes the mixing. If the 
person is not asking a particular question I instruct him or her 
to empty the mind and concentrate on the hands, or simply on 
the Significator. If the reading does concern a specific question 
I ask the person to focus on that and even say the question out 
loud to fix it more firmly in the mind. 

The method of shuffling does not matter, except that it must 
be thorough and some of the cards must become turned 
around to allow reversed meanings to emerge. One method I 
sometimes recommend is to lay the cards on the table or floor 
(many readers always do their readings on the silk scarf they 
use to wrap the deck), then with both hands scatter them all 
around, like a child playing in the mud. Then I tell the person 
to bring the cards back together. Besides its thoroughness this 
method carries a nice symbolism. Any Tarot reading repre¬ 
sents a personal pattern emerging from the chaos of possible 
combinations. Even if we only read ten cards the whole deck 
bears the imprint of the person who last mixed them. By scat¬ 
tering the deck we return it to chaos; when we bring it back 
together, it carries the new pattern. 

With the cards mixed the subject must separate them into 
three piles in the following way. Using the left hand he or she 
must remove a pile from the top and place it to the left, then 
from that pile again remove a pile from the top and lay it down 
on the left. 

Now the reader takes over, and here again people disagree 
about how to put the deck back together. Some simply pick up 
the pile on the right with the left hand, place it over the middle 
pile and then put these two piles over the pile on the left. 
Others hold their left hand a few inches over each pile until a 
warmth seems to rise from one of them. They then place this 
pile over the other two. 

Either way, when the deck has re-formed, the reader, using 
the right hand, begins to turn over the cards in whatever 
pattern he or she has decided to follow. Hundreds of patterns 
exist. Of the three presented here, one I made up, while the 
other two are variations on traditional themes. Almost any 
book on Tarot will give further patterns. 



140 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

THE CELTIC CROSS 


Over the years this pattern has proved the most popular. The 
Cross derives its name from its shape, a cross of equal arms 
(one card on each side of the centre), with four cards lined up 
as a ‘Staff’ beside it (see Fig. 59, p.147). 

As we might expect, commentators disagree on the meaning 
of particular positions and how to describe them. Some, such 
as Waite and Eden Gray, provide a sort of ritual for the reader 
to pronounce while laying out the cards: ‘This covers him’ or 
‘This lies beneath him’. Others prefer more conventional 
phraseology. It does not matter which system we use as long 
as we remain constant. The meanings described below are the 
ones I use. I'hey follow the traditional system, with certain 
changes. 

THE SMALL CROSS 

In every way of laying out the Celtic Cross the first two cards 
form a small cross of their own with the first one, the ‘cover' 
card, lying directly on top of the Significator and the second 
lying horizontally across it. 

Now, the cover card usually stands for some basic influence 
on the subject, a general situation or starting point for the 
reading. The second card, which we always read right side up, 
despite how it comes off the deck, represents in traditional 
systems an ‘opposing influence’, something counter to the 
first. In practice, this ‘opposition’ may actually form a second 
influence supporting the first. 

For example, suppose the cover card was the Fool, indicat¬ 
ing a sense of following instincts despite what may seem the 
more sensible practice. If Temperance crossed it, we could call 
it an opposition, since Temperance usually refers to caution. 
But if the Knight of Wands crossed the Fool, the two cards 
would tend to support each other, and in fact the other cards 
might suggest a need for a more temperate influence to 
balance all that eagerness. 

In my work I have developed a slightly different way of 
looking at the first two cards, referring to them not as cover 
and ‘opposition’ but as ‘Centre’ and ‘crossing’. For their 
meanings I term them the ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ aspects, or some¬ 
times ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ time, or simply ‘being’ and 
‘doing’. The Centre card shows some basic quality of the 



TYPES OF READINGS 


141 


person or the person’s situation. I'he crossing card then shows 
how that quality affects the person, or how it translates into 
action. Put another way, the first shows what the person is, 
the second how he or she acts. 

Consider the example in Fig. 57. The Fool would indicate a 
person with an inner tendency to take chances, to follow 
instinct. Temperance crossing it would mean that when it 
comes to action the person tends towards a more careful 
approach, blending instinctive energy with more practical 
considerations. 



Figure 57 

Another example will help illustrate this most valuable part 
of a Celtic Cross reading. The Ace of Cups in the Centre 
would indicate a time of happiness in a person’s life, or more 
precisely a chance of happiness, since the Aces represent 
opportunities. If the Ten of Cups crossed the Ace the two 
would imply that the person recognizes the opportunities and 
will use them. But if the Four of Cups should cross the Ace a 
different meaning will emerge, showing an apathetic attitude 
that prevents the person appreciating what life offers him or 
her. The apathy, however, would not cancel out the oppor¬ 
tunity. 

I have stressed the small cross because of its importance. In 
some readings the first two cards can tell the whole story, with 
the others filling in details. As described in Fart One the terms 
’vertical and horizontal time’ derive from symbolic interpreta- 





142 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


tions of the crucifixion, where Eternity, embodied in Christ as 
the Son of God, intersected the ‘horizontal’ movement of 
history, that is, the death of one human being. For Christian 
mystics the fact of the crucifixion allows them - through 
meditation on the cross and other methods of identification 
with Christ - to bring a sense of ‘vertical’ time into the 
horizontal facts of their own physical existences. In many 
other cultures the image of a cross symbolizes the four 
horizontal directions along the surface of the earth, while the 
centre, the meeting place of the four, suggests the essentially 
vertical direction of the centre. The cross, therefore, also sym¬ 
bolizes the Tarot itself, the four arms being the four suits and 
the centre the Major Arcana. 

In terms of readings, the cross symbolism can show the way 
in which a person’s substance, or inner being, can mix with 
the way that person acts in the world. It is worth repeating 
here the original example which suggested the symbolism of 
crossed time. The reading was done for a man unsure of the 
direction of his life. A long love affair was ending, his chosen 
career as a professional singer had not materialized. The 
reading began with the High Priestess crossed by the Hiero¬ 
phant. Now these cards, sometimes called the Papess and the 
Pope, at first glance represent contradictory values. The High 
Priestess stands for instinct, mystery, stillness, while the 
Hierophant, as the preacher of a doctrine by which people 
may guide their lives, stands for orthodoxy, planned 
behaviour, clarity. Therefore, it appeared that the two sym¬ 
bolized conflicting approaches to life. The more I looked at 
them, however, with their religious imagery, the more I 
thought of conjunctions, rather than opposites. The two 
seemed to prescribe almost a way of dealing with life. The 
High Priestess indicated that within himself this man carried 
qualities of instinct and understanding that might never fully 
emerge but could give his life substance. The Hierophant, on 
the other hand, showed that in his daily life he needed a more 
rational plan of action; he needed to organize and make 
definite decisions to achieve what he wanted. But these plans 
and practical steps would work best if backed by his own 
instincts and inner awareness rather than by socially- 
acceptable ideas of proper goals and behaviour. Just as I was 
trying to explain how these qualities could complement each 
other the man broke in to say how he saw them as constantly 



TYPES OF READINGS 


143 


in opposition, how he swung back and forth, giving in first to 
his desires or simply to passivity, and then moving the other 
way to very directed orthodox action, such as getting a 
‘responsible' middle-class job rather than pursue his singing. 
Fart of my job in the reading became to show him how these 
qualities could work together. 

‘BASIS’ 

After the small cross the reader places the next card directly 
below the Centre. This position represents the ‘Basis' of the 
reading - a situation or event, usually, though not always, in 
the past, which has helped create the current situation. 
Because of the way our past shapes us this card can sometimes 
explain and tie together all the others. In one remarkable 




Figure 5S 





144 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


reading about a woman’s difficulties relating to her husband, 
the Emperor in the Basis position indicated that her relation¬ 
ship to her father still dominated her unconscious sexuality 
and was preventing her from working out her current 
problems. 

Usually the Basis does not show such a broad theme, but 
often it does indicate a previous situation, especially if a con¬ 
nection exists with the number or suit of one of the first two 
cards. Consider these three cards: the Magician crossed by 
the Five of Cups, with the Five of Swords beneath them (see 
Fig. 58). The Magician, as the person’s being, shows a strong, 
highly-creative and dynamic personality. The Five of Cups, 
however, indicates that the person is currently preoccupied 
with some loss so that the powerful personality has become 
subdued. In terms of the pictures, the Magician has covered 
his dazzling white and red robe in a black cloak. The Five of 
Swords, however, shows that the loss began as a painful and 
humiliating defeat. It is this defeat which has dimmed the 
Magician’s fire. But the move from Swords to Cups shows that 
already a process of renewal has begun. The person can begin 
to see the situation as one of regret rather than shame. What 
makes this movement possible is the Magician qualities, cur¬ 
rently concealed yet still active in the person’s life. 

‘RECENT PAST’ 

The next card lies to the left of the small cross and bears the 
title ‘Recent Past’. The term is really a misnomer, for the 
difference between this position and the Basis lies not so much 
in the timescale as in their impact on the person. The Recent 
Past refers to events or situations that affect the subject, yet 
have passed or are passing out of importance. Usually it does 
refer to recent events; sometimes, however, it can show some 
thing reaching far back or of great importance. In the example 
above, of the woman whose father affected her so strongly, if 
the Emperor had appeared in the Recent Past instead of the 
Basis, it would have indicated that the block was receding 
from her life, and would not affect her so much in the future. 

‘POSSIBLE OUTCOME’ 

The next card goes directly above the small cross. Some 
people term this position the ‘Best Possible Outcome’. 
However, a little practice will demonstrate the narrowness of 



TYPES OF READINGS 


145 


this optimistic title. If, say, the Nine of Swords shows up here 
it can hardly be called the ‘best' result. Therefore, like many 
others, I refer to this position as simply ‘Possible Outcome'. 
Now, since we call the final card ‘Outcome' people may find 
the two terms confusing. By ‘possible’ we mean first of all a 
more general trend that may result from the influences shown 
in the reading. At the moment, it remains vague and may 
never actually come about. It simply means the person is 
heading in this direction. 

Sometimes the relationship between the Possible Outcome 
and the Outcome includes cause and effect. The Possible may 
result from the Outcome. As a simple example, suppose the 
Outcome shows the Eight of Pentacles and the Possible 
Outcome shows the Three. The Eight indicates that the 
person will go through a period of hard work and learning. 
The Three indicates that this effort is likely to produce the 
desired result of great skill and success. 

Sometimes the Possible Outcome indicates a more tentative 
result than the Outcome. Here is an example from a reading 
done several years ago for a woman who had applied for a job 
and wanted to know her chances of getting it. The Outcome 
card indicated delays and suspense but the Possible Outcome 
showed success. When the woman went to find out, the hiring 
agent told her that they had hired someone else but had put 
her on an alternate list. Several days later he called to tell her 
that the someone else had changed her mind and he wanted to 
hire the woman. The possible had become real. 

There is another way of comparing the Possible Outcome 
and the Outcome, especially if the two contradict each other 
(rather than complement, as in the examples above), or if they 
show a direct relationship, such as the same suit or number. 
In these situations I read the Possible Outcome as something 
that might have happened but will not. The task then is to 
look at the other cards for the reason why the outcome should 
happen instead. 

Suppose the Star lies in the person’s Possible Outcome, 
indicating that the person might emerge feeling very free, full 
of hope, open to life. Suppose then that the Devil comes up as 
the actual Outcome, indicating bondage to an oppressive 
situation. What has gone wrong? If, say, the Nine of Swords 
reversed lies in the position of Basis, this would give us a clue, 
for it would say that the person holds inside her or him a sense 


146 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


of shame and humiliation coming from past weaknesses and 
fears, and that the ‘imprisonment’ symbolized in the Nine 
prevents the person from realizing the potential of the Star. 

These examples will help us to see that the true meaning of 
a Tarot reading does not come from specific cards but rather 
from the configurations they form together. 

‘NEAR FUTURE’ 

The final arm of the Cross comes to the right of the central 
pattern. Lying opposite the Recent Past it bears the title ‘Near 
Future’. It shows some situation that the person will soon have 
to face. It does not carry the same totality as the Outcome; 
rather it forms yet another influence, in this case the influence 
of events. If a situation begins in a certain way but ends very 
differently, then the reason might lie in the Near Future 
bringing in some new situation or person to change the direc¬ 
tion. On the other hand, if the Outcome is very different in 
character from the Near Future this might indicate that the 
coming situation will have no lasting effect. For example, if the 
Five of Wands lies in the Near Future, and the Three of Cups 
in the Outcome, it can indicate that the person will go through 
a period of conflict with friends, but that this conflict will not 
last long, giving way to closer ties, and cooperation. Often 
such information can greatly help a person come through a 
difficult time by reassuring him or her that it will not last. And 
if the opposite should appear (that is, a happy situation will 
give way to a bad one) the reader can simply hope that the 
person can use this information well. Bad news is always less 
pleasant to give than good. 

After laying out the Cross the reader turns up the final four 
cards, one above the other, to the right of the Cross. The final 
pattern looks like this: 

















148 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

‘SELF’ 

The card on the bottom of the Staff is called ‘Self’, and refers 
not to the whole person, but to some way in which the person 
her or himself is contributing to the situation. What attitudes 
does the subject show? What is she or he doing that will affect 
the situation described in the other cards? Suppose, in a 
reading that began with the Two of Cups, the Self position 
shows the Two of Swords. This would indicate that the 
subject finds it difficult to open up to the new relationship 
indicated by the first card. The subject’s tense, even hostile 
behaviour greatly affects the overall situation. The Outcome 
would indicate the result of the conflict. 

‘ENVIRONMENT’ 

Just as the subject affects the reading so also do the people 
and general situations around him or her. We call the eighth 
card the 'Environment' or the influence of'Others'. If a court 
card appears in this position it will usually mean a person 
influencing the subject. Otherwise the card can show either 
the effect of one important person or of a more general situa¬ 
tion. Often it will indicate whether the environment is helping 
or hindering the direction in which the subject is heading. For 
instance, in a reading done about work, the Five of Wands 
reversed in the Environment would suggest that an 
atmosphere of hostility, trickery, and backstabbing competi¬ 
tion is making work unpleasant. 

Sometimes the Environment indicates the querent rather 
than other people. It shows how the subject reacts to her or his 
surroundings. In a reading done some time ago the Four of 
Swords in the Environment showed the person’s habit of 
retreating from conflicts with the people around him. 

‘HOPES AND FEARS’ 

Above the Environment comes a position similar to Self but 
one with a sharper focus. We call this position ‘Hopes and 
Fears’ for it shows how the person's attitudes to the future 
affect the working out of events. Often this card will almost 
dominate the reading, especially if the Outcome is very diffe¬ 
rent from the Possible Outcome, indicating that what seems 
likely will not happen after all. The influence shown by this 
card can work either for or against the person. Suppose the 
reading concerns a love affair, and most of the cards tend to 


TYPES OF READINGS 


149 


success, with the Two of Cups as the Possible Outcome. Yet 
the Outcome shows the Lovers reversed, a clear sign that the 
relationship goes badly. If the Hopes and Fears card was the 
Three of Swords it would show that the person’s fear of heart¬ 
break has prevented the necessary emotional commitment. At 
other times, a very positive card in this position, such as the 
Star or the Six of Wands (both cards that mean hope), would 
indicate that the person’s attitude can create success. 

Sometimes this position and that of Basis or Self will work 
very closely together, with the Basis explaining the origins of 
the subject’s attitudes to the future. For instance, if the Two of 
Cups reversed came up as the Hopes and Fears, and Eight of 
Wands reversed was the Basis, it would indicate that a 
background of jealousy was leading to a very negative attitude 
towards the continuance of the love affair. 

Notice in this last example that the Two of Cups reversed 
might be a fear, but it might also be a hope. We call the 
position Hopes and Fears rather than the more usual Hopes or 
Fears. The terminology reflects the fact that the two often go 
together (something originally pointed out to me by my 
therapist student). In work, often people hope for and fear 
success at the same time, while in relationships many people 
will fear the love they seek, or will half consciously hope for 
rejection. The duality of Hopes and Fears shows up most 
strongly in cards dealing with change, or the emergence from 
confined situations to open ones. 

Death, the Eight of Cups, the Two of Wands reversed, and 
the Four of Wands all deal with these themes of freedom and 
change. Some others are the Devil reversed, the Eight of 
Swords reversed, and the Star. Very often if the subject and 
the reader together examine the subject's attitude to one of 
these images in the Hopes and Fears position, an ambivalence 
will emerge. Confinement is more secure than freedom. 
Because the unpleasant component - the fear of love (or 
success), or the hope of rejection (or failure) - often remains 
hidden from the conscious desires, the discovery of this 
ambivalence can help the subject work on creating what he or 
she really wants. 

Seeing this duality at work in one reading after another 
teaches the reader some basic facts about conditioning. The 
subconscious (the repressed material we might call the lower 
layer of the ego - again, see footnote on page 157) is basically 


150 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


conservative, even reactionary. It not only resists any change, 
whether desirable or distasteful, it also prefers to deal with all 
situations in the same way it dealt with similar situations in 
the past. For many people each new friend or lover becomes 
the stage for repeating the story of Mummy and Daddy. We 
face each new problem or task the way we we learned to deal 
with problems as children. No matter if we dealt with them 
successfully; that counts for less than the safety of having a 
fixed pattern to follow. The subconscious looks first to security 
and then to other considerations. And security comes through 
repetition. 

Now, this hidden mechanism of repeating past patterns has 
built-in survival value. When new problems arise we can 
handle them because the subconscious automatically 
compares them to previous problems and then clicks into the 
ready-made response. Unless a person wishes to embark on a 
deliberate programme of self-creation (such as the Major 
Arcana outlines) this system will work fairly well and 
probably should not be tampered with. However, if a person 
finds one love affair after another collapsing into jealousy and 
bitterness, or one job after another failing, then she or he 
might do well to examine the way the subconscious insists on 
arranging new situations to repeat the past. One way of at 
least beginning such an examination can be Tarot readings, 
with their emphasis on past experience, and what we really 
hope for and fear. 

‘OUTCOME’ 

Finally, the Outcome. This card brings together all the others. 
More, it balances them out and shows which influences are 
strongest, and how they work together to produce the result. 
Sometimes the Outcome will be an event. Then the important 
question becomes how it came about, not just what it is. If the 
subject finds it an unpleasant event, then she or he can look at 
the other cards to see what influences are pushing in that 
direction, with the hope of changing the situation. If the 
Outcome appears desirable then a similar study can help 
increase those influences, already strong, which are tending 
towards that result. 

The Celtic Cross, like any spread, consists of a fixed 
number of cards. If the reader and subject find the mixture 
ambivalent, they can either turn over some more cards 


TYPES OF READINGS 


151 


without a fixed pattern, or else do a further reading. In 
turning over extra cards I usually stick to no more than five 
(sometimes asking the subject to choose a number), though at 
times the initial reading has served as the basis for turning 
over most of the deck. Usually, beginning readers find it more 
difficult to interpret cards at random and therefore avoid 
using them. 

Sometimes we may do further readings to get information 
about a specific card in the first reading. We might have a 
question about a person referred to in the Near Future 
position. In this situation some readers will use the card in 
question as the Significator for the new reading, just as the 
original Significator helped the person to concentrate on him 
or herself, so the new card helps the person focus on the par¬ 
ticular question. 

A SAMPLE READING 

Before leaving the Celtic Cross I would like to present a 
sample reading done by me some months before writing this 
book. (I should state that the subject gave her consent for it to 
be included.) 

The reading was done for a woman who had just passed her 
bar exam, who had recently begun a new love affair, and in 
general appeared happy and excited about her life. Yet when I 
turned over the cards I received an immediate sense of 
sadness. Trusting the cards rather than my conscious impres¬ 
sions I asked the woman if she had been feeling sad recently. 
To my surprise she immediately said yes. 

The cards came out as follows. For the Significator the 
woman chose the Queen of Pentacles. The first two cards were 
the Three of Wands crossed by the Knight of Cups. The Basis 
was Death, the Recent Past the Nine of Swords, the Possible 
Outcome the Five of Swords reversed, and Near Future the 
World reversed. The Self was the Six of Cups reversed, the 
Environment the Three of Cups, the Hopes and Fears the 
Tower, the Hermit the Outcome. (See fig. 60). 

I began by giving the woman a general interpretation. She 
was going through a time of transition when many old 
patterns were dying out. The effect of this was frightening as 
well as exhilarating. The sadness came from realizing what 
she had lost, and also from the fact that she had grown up and 
cut her ties to her childhood. The situation would not resolve 



SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


OTHOAX 3MX 


















TYPES OF READINGS 


153 


itself very quickly - there was even a chance it would develop 
badly, especially if she let the Near Future, showing stagna¬ 
tion, frighten her into a very negative attitude. The people 
around her, however, gave her a lot of support, even if 
ultimately she needed to work it out herself. 

All this, of course, was very general. We then went over the 
cards one by one. The cover card, the Three of Wands, 
indicated first of all her immediate achievements, not just 
graduating from law school, but even going in the first place. 
For as we discussed what she had done she told me how before 
she had gone to law school she had never taken her life or her 
abilities very seriously. Now she had reached a point where 
she not only knew her own strength and intelligence, but the 
accomplishment of passing the bar exam on the first attempt 
had given her a solid base from which to look for future work. 
Even before we discussed these facts the meaning of them 
came through the image of the man standing on the cliff while 
sending his boats out to explore new lands. 

But the Three of Wands carries another meaning, one very 
suited to this reading. It implies a contemplative attitude as a 
person looks over her memories. Actually, this looking over 
her life came out of the sense of accomplishment, l he things 
she had done made her aware of how her old life had ended. 
At the same time the boats going out to unknown waters sym¬ 
bolized her situation of not really knowing what she would do 
next, or even what shape her life would take in the future. 

The image of accomplishment and exploration bore 
reference to other things in the woman's life besides her 
career. She had recently begun psychotherapy; she had also 
joined a support group called ‘the healing circle’. Both of these 
activities increased the sense of newness and the unknown, for 
while they gave her confidence and belief in herself they also 
made it much more difficult to hold on to past patterns. 

Now, the Knight of Cups lay across the Three of Wands 
and here the second card appears very much as an outcome of 
the first. For the Knight of Cups signifies an involvement with 
oneself, with looking inward. The two cards together said that 
in the centre of her life the woman at that moment was con¬ 
templating the past, thinking about what her life had been, 
and looking to the future. But the Knight of Cups is the least 
connected to action of any of the Knights. When it came to 
practical steps she found herself very hesitant. 



154 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Below the small cross came Death, the first Major card. 
Death emphasized the experience of seeing the past die away. 
All her life the woman had maintained certain patterns: 
certain ways of dealing with the world, with other people, with 
herself. Now, because of her achievements these old ways no 
longer applied. Almost without warning she found herself cut 
off from the safe patterns w ithout much idea of how to face the 
future. More about these patterns became clear as we con¬ 
sidered cards of Self and Outcome, but here it was simply 
important to see that the old, whatever shape it had taken, 
had died. 

Notice the resemblance of the Knight of Cups to Death. 
Since the trump lies in the Basis - the past - and the Minor 
card in the present, we can call the Knight a practical develop¬ 
ment from the archetype of Death. That is, underneath she is 
experiencing the loss of her old life, but on the surface she 
finds a lack of confidence, emotional as well as practical, 
about what to do next. 

The Recent Past came directly from the Basis. It shows how 
the two positions can exist almost in the same time frame. In 
other words, the Basis did not come first and then give way to 
the Recent Past, but, like the small cross, the Recent Past 
came out of the general pattern shown by the Basis. Now, the 
Nine of Swords indicates sorrow, grief. It can at times sym¬ 
bolize mourning. In this case we can think of ‘mourning' as a 
metaphor. The person she grieves for is herself, for w'e have 
seen in the Basis that something has ‘died’. That something 
was not harmful, it had simply lost meaning. However, the 
fact that her life had gone beyond it did not stop her from 
missing the safe and comfortable ways of dealing with the 
world. Nor does the card really suggest that she misses her old 
self because she fears life. The sadness here is more genuine 
and, in fact, coexisted with the equally real joy and excitement 
I had seen before the reading. 

The first four cards have stressed her inner life; the next two 
showed the Tarot's ability to indicate trends and events, and 
in particular to give a warning. First the Possible Outcome. 
The Five of Swords reversed indicates defeat, producing 
shame and humiliation. Its presence here showed that despite 
all that the woman had accomplished her efforts might still 
come to nothing. Now, sometimes the Outcome card will 
clearly contradict the Possible Outcome, showing that for 



TYPES OF READINGS 


155 


some reason the possibility will not become reality. Here the 
relationship is more subtle. The Hermit is a good indicator 
that she will not lose what she has gained, but it does not 
guarantee anything. It shows her headed in a good direction, 
but not yet arriving, at least not in the practical sense. 
Therefore, the Five of Swords remained a possibility, and the 
Tarot was warning her to do what she could - use the support 
of her friends, not give in to her fears, especially during 
periods of stagnation - to avoid this result. 

The World reversed stands for non-movement, a lack of 
success, the inability to put things together. As the Near 
Future it indicated that her life would remain unsettled for 
some time, without much advancement in her career and in 
other ways. We see therefore that the defeat of her new self 
shown as possible might come when that self fails to achieve 
practical results. The fact that the Tarot has warned her of 
this stagnant period could help her get through it, as could 
knowing that it is only the Near Future and not the Outcome. 

After the Cross comes the Staff. The first of the four cards, 
the Six of Cups reversed, lay in the position of Self. And here 
we found a clearer indication of what had died. The card, 
when right side up, shows a child in a garden with a larger 
figure giving her a gift. It implies protection, security, the 
child whose parents take care of all its needs. Here, however, 
we see the card reversed. Together with the other cards, 
especially Death and the Hermit, the image implied that she 
had overthrown this enclosed, protected way of life. In 
discussing this card it became clear that in fact the woman 
had spent most of her life with her parents treating her as their 
‘little girl’. She had let them do this because of the security it 
gave her. Even now, as she explained to me, her parents, 
especially her father, could not accept that she had grown up 
and must make her own decisions, take her own chances. And 
of course she herself had found the change hard to accept. 
Going to law school had been the first step. Before that she 
had never taken herself seriously enough to do something 
important. At the same time the school had remained another 
‘garden’ - a situation where she did not have to make any 
choices, but just follow the strict pattern laid out for her. 
When the time came for her to take her exam, she had become 
frightened, and in fact had gone to the therapist to help her 
pass. The therapy had done this, but it did other things as 



156 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


well. It made her see that she was no longer a child who could 
let other people make her decisions. The sadness came from 
this loss. 

The next card was in some ways the most important, as well 
as the simplest in the whole reading. The Three of Cups in the 
Environment indicated great support from friends. In par¬ 
ticular it represented the ‘healing circle' and the therapist. Its 
importance lay in the fact that it showed how much uncritical 
support she could draw from these people, especially impor¬ 
tant with the possibility of defeat from a period of stagnancy. 
The Three of Cups does not show support in any sense of 
charity or self-sacrifice. The three women dance together. 'The 
people around her give her strength simply from being with 
her, from sharing her experiences and letting her support them. 
Notice also the contrast between the Three and the Six. Here 
the women are all equal; the card carries no sense of sheltering 
or coddling. 

The Three of Cups bears a ‘horizontal' connection to the 
Three of Wands as the Centre. Some of the grounding 
influences in that image - the figure firmly planted on the 
hilltop - derive from the support given in the environment. 
Even though looking back on her life, and exploring new 
areas, remained essentially lonely activities, she could draw 
courage from the people around her. 

In the position of Hopes and Fears lay one of the more 
fearful images in the Tarot, the Tower. It signifies destruction, 
collapse, painful experience. Clearly it represents the woman's 
fears that all she has accomplished will somehow fly apart. 
This fear could easily make itself a self-fulfilling prophecy, 
leading to the Five of Swords reversed, especially without 
immediate success to reassure and encourage her. 

The exaggerated fear goes back to the Six of Cups, and its 
overthrow. She may have given up a sheltered childlike 
attitude, she may have been looking on her life with excited 
expectation, yet a part of her still thought, ‘How can I do this? 
I’m all alone now. I'm not protected any more. I’ve got to 
make my own decisions.’ And from there it crosses to ‘I can’t 
do this. I’m not strong enough, it’s all going to fall apart.’ 
When opposition or delay arose, the fe«4r would take over, 
making it seem like the expected collapse. And the half¬ 
conscious thought then becomes ‘See? I knew I couldn’t do it. 
Why did I ever cut myself off?’ In the reading we discussed the 



TYPES OF READINGS 


157 


possibility that the Tower also represented a subconscious 
hope. The subconscious, a very stupid as well as very con¬ 
servative organ,* will often refuse to accept the loss of a situa¬ 
tion it considered safe or secure. No matter that the self 
knows, even consciously, that it can never return to parental 
protection. The subconscious does not accept reality. It can 
easily convince itself that defeat of the current plans will bring 
a return to safety. 

To become aware of such hidden attitudes goes a long way 
towards overcoming them, for the subconscious depends a 
great deal on concealment. We can see this by thinking of the 
times we have harboured some secret anxiety, only to find 
when we say it out loud that the sheer silliness of the idea 
dispels it from our mind. A Tarot reading can act in this 
fashion by identifying the hidden material and showing its 
probable consequences - in this case, the Five of Swords. 

In the position of Outcome lay the Hermit. The first thing 
to observe about this card is that it does not show success or 
failure. In contrast with the Three of Wands and the Five of 
Swords it does not indicate likely practical developments. 
Instead it points to qualities in the woman herself that in turn 
will show the way she faces her new' situation. 

The most obvious meaning of the Hermit derives from its 
name and basic image. It shows her facing life alone. Now, 
this does not mean that she loses or denies the support from 
her environment. If anything, it indicates the need to draw on 
that support as much as possible. For the Hermit signifies the 

*Do not confuse the ‘subconscious’ with the ‘unconscious', whose 
attributes include courage as well as true knowledge. A great deal of 
confusion has resulted from the use of these two terms as synony¬ 
mous. I am using the term ‘subconscious’ here to stand for material 
- desires, anxieties, fears, hopes - repressed by the conscious mind 
as it deals with the outer realities of life. ‘Unconscious' means the 
basic energy of life, that area of being beyond the personal ego. The 
subconscious, despite its hidden qualities, is really an extension of 
the ego. In a sense, it embodies the ego's absolute domain, that 
realm where it makes no compromises with reality. Because it does 
not concern itself with consequences the subsconscious will walk you 
in front of a truck to avoid an unpleasant conversation. The uncon¬ 
scious, on the other hand, balances and supports us by joining us to 
the great surge of life beyond our individual selves. The Hanged 
Man in the Major Arcana gives us a powerful image of this vital con¬ 
nection. 



158 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


fact that as much as others can help her she alone must make 
the decisions. Like the figure in the Three of Wands the 
Hermit stands alone on his mountain. 

The Hermit’s aloneness, however, does not exist for its own 
sake. In the Major Arcana it symbolizes the act of withdraw¬ 
ing consciousness from the outer world and events to consider 
meaning. And of course the idea of meaning fits quite well in 
this particular reading. To have the Hermit as the Outcome 
means that the fears, the delays, and the possible defeats do 
not really matter so much - once the woman accepts her situa¬ 
tion. Indeed, the Hermit directly symbolizes psychotherapy. 

At the same time the Hermit also hints towards the success 
of her coming to terms with life. For in its most archetypal 
aspect it signifies wisdom, true knowledge of the soul gained 
through removal and introspection. The Hermit’s mountain, 
like the Hanged Man’s tree, stands for the conscious mind's 
connection to the wisdom and life energy of the unconscious. 

As the Outcome, therefore, the Hermit indicated that she 
would understand and accept the changes she had made, half 
unconsciously, in her life. The mountain symbolism connects 
the last card to the first, the Three of Wands. The connection, 
in turn, hints at practical as well as emotional success. 

Finally, the Hermit signifies maturity. Through its 
awareness it carries on the process begun in the Six of Cups 
reversed, the overthrowing of childlike dependency. It shows 
her that the situation will resolve itself as the woman over¬ 
comes her hesitancy and fears. In the long run the Hermit 's 
mountain stands not for isolation at all, but simply for a 
quality the woman was only then beginning to experience - 
self-reliance, confidence in her own ability and judgements. 

Because the Outcome showed a working out rather than a 
result, I decided to turn over another card to get an indication 
of how events might eventually turn out. The card was 
another three, the Three of Pentacles. As a card of 
accomplishment and mastery, it showed the long-term success 
that was delayed in the Near Future. 

THE WORK CYCLE 

Despite its power, the Celtic Cross stills works mostly as a 
descriptive tool, showing us the different influences surroun¬ 
ding some situation. Though it often implies a course of action 



TYPES OF READINGS 


159 


(‘"lake a careful approach, work at setting everything up 
before you do anything' or ‘Things won't work out with this 
person. You’ll find your own self again if you let him go.’) 
People sometimes find themselves left with the question, 
‘What should I do?’ While the Tarot does not often give 
suggestions as concrete as ‘Study pottery', or ‘Visit your gran¬ 
dmother* it may indicate the sort of action or approach a 
person needs, leaving the specific details to the individual. As 
a simple example, the Eight of Pentacles can advise a person 
‘Keep working at what you are doing. It will take time, but it 
eventually will bring good results.’ 

There are other, more subtle, questions that people some¬ 
times ask themselves after a Celtic Cross reading: What if I 
followed a different set of influences? What if I didn't take this 
particular attitude to the future, or looked to something diffe¬ 
rent in my past? How would that change the outcome? In 
other words, what are the possible changes I can make? 

To emphasize the possibilities of advice I have devised a 
new layout for the cards. Based partly on the Celtic Cross and 
partly on my own arrangement of the Major Arcana, it carries 
three innovations. First, its whole outlook leans towards 
advice rather than description. Second, it is open ended; after 
the reader has reached the last position she or he can lay out 
more cards, up to ten times the original amount. Of course the 
reader can do this in any reading, but not in definite positions. 
The structure of the Work Cycle, as I call this spread, allows 
the reader to repeat, and keep repeating, the original posi¬ 
tions. The effect is to let the reader look at the situation from 
different sides. 

The third innovation involves reading cards in combina¬ 
tions. In many readings (though certainly not all; see the Tree 
of Life method below) the cards are read individually, even 
though we attempt to combine the meanings, as in the Cross. 
In the Work Cycle, however, the positions include the idea of 
combinations. Readers who know Volume One of this book 
will remember that my interpretation of the Major Arcana 
divides the trumps into the Fool plus three lines of seven cards 
each, with each line showing a different stage of development. 
They may also remember that each line breaks down further 
into three parts. The first two cards signify the starting point 
for the line - the archetypes or basic qualities the person must 
use in going through the experiences shown in that line. The 


160 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


middle three stand for the basic work of the line - what the 
person must assimilate or overcome. The final two cards show 
the result. Thus, in the first line the Magician and the High 
Priestess indicate the basic archetypes of life. The Empress, 
the Emperor, and the I lierophant show the different aspects of 
the outer world facing us as we grow up. The Lovers and the 
Chariot symbolize the development of the successful 
individual. The Work Cycle borrows and adapts this tripartite 
structure. 

THE LAYOUT — POSITIONS AND MEANINGS 

The reading begins w'ith choosing the Significator and mixing 
the cards in the same manner as with the Celtic Cross. 
Similarly, the first two cards from a small cross, interpreted 
much the same way as in the older method of reading, with 
perhaps more emphasis on the crossing card being an 
outcome or development of the Centre card. 

After the small cross the reader turns over seven cards in a 
row below the Significator rather than around it, with the 
Significator and Cross standing above the middle card. (Sec 
Fig. 61). 

This line forms the basic cycle, and the reading may stop 
with these nine cards. However, if after interpreting this line, 
the reader and subject desire more information or simply 
another approach, the reader turns over a second line of seven 
directly below the first, and so on, until the meaning becomes 
clear. 

In each line the first two cards for the starting point. Their 
specific meanings derive from the Celtic Cross, the first being 
Past Experience, interpreted similarly to the Basis card in the 
older form. The second is Expectations, the person's attitude 
to the future. In practice, w'e interpret this card in much the 
same way as the Hopes and Fears position of the Celtic Cross. 
Together, the two cards show what has happened and what 
the person hopes, fears, or simply believes will happen. 

The next three cards depart more strongly from the older 
system. They show what I call the Work - situations, 
influences, or attitudes the person can use or must overcome. 
In the Cross the positions represent fairly fixed patterns. This 
is the way it is. The Work cards indicate possibilities, even 
opportunities. It emphasizes how the person creates the situa¬ 
tion - and can change it. 



























162 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


When I began this form of reading I assigned a meaning to 
each position. The card in the centre indicated Self, the one in 
the left Others, and the one on the right Events. 1 soon found it 
better to give no specific quality to any of them, but rather to 
interpret them together as simply what the person has to work 
with in the situation, a combination of possibilities. At the 
same time the three designations are worth remembering, for 
one or more of them may help to pinpoint the meaning in 
specific readings. 

Let me give an example of the three as a combination. 
Suppose a reading deals with that old favourite, a new 
romance. A woman has met someone she likes but does not 
know how he feels about her, or whether she should do 
anything about her feelings. The Work section of the reading 
shows the Five of Wands, the Hermit reversed, and the Two of 
Cups (see Fig. 62). 

Now, the Two of Cups obviously indicates that the man 
feels about her in a similar way, just as it would in the Celtic 
Cross. But here the card further advises the woman to tell the 
man about her feelings. It also suggests she has much to gain 
from being with the person, and that the love affair, whether 
long or short, will affect her life quite strongly. 

The Hermit reinforces these ideas. Here its reversed 
position does not mean immaturity, but rather the idea that 
now is not the time for aloneness. Instead, the woman will 










TYPES OF READINGS 


163 


gain most from being involved in the relationship. The Five of 
Wands, however, suggests that the situation includes conflict. 
Because it appears right side up, it does not indicate bitterness 
or even a serious disturbance that the woman should try to 
avoid. Instead it shows a quickening quality to their fighting, 
one that exhilarates rather than drains them. And because it 
occurs in the Work section, it implies she should use the energy 
released through conflict rather than try to avoid it. 

The Hermit coming between the two cards indicates 
perhaps that the woman has spent some time cut off from 
other people and now wishes (or needs) to return to the world. 
On the one hand she can use her new relationship to bring her 
out of herself. On the other hand, she will Find involvement 
with other people brings quarrels and competition, and she 
must learn to accept and use these things. 

Notice that the three cards do not simply show what is, but 
rather directions and potentials - things to work with. Now let 
us consider two possible starting points for this imaginary 
reading and the different ways in which they modify the Work 
cards. First of all, let us consider the meaning if the first two 
cards are the Five of Cups and the Three of Cups, connected 
by the image of the three cups. The first, as Past Experience, 
indicates the loss of something - most likely the end of a love 
affair - and would give the background to the Hermit. 
Therefore, Past Experience tells us that the Hermit stage 
came as a reaction to an event, but a reaction the woman can 
now put behind her. The Three reinforces these ideas of new 
involvement. It shows a very optimistic attitude that will likely 
carry her over the conflicts that arise. 

Suppose, however, that we switch the starting point to 
Swords, specifically the Eight followed by the Four. The Eight 
would indicate a history of repression, isolation, confusion, 
while the Four would suggest that this past situation has left 
the woman scarred, for as the Expectation it shows a desire to 
hide from the world, to avoid involvement with others. At the 
same time the Four would represent a fear - or belief - that 
she will spend her life alone, with no one breaking into the 
closed church to awaken her and return her to the world. 

With such a starting point the Work cards would indicate 
an important opportunity for the person. They would tell her 
that this relationship can bring her out of her lonely Hermit 
state. The time has come to emerge, and if this emergence 



164 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


brings conflicts and arguments she must accept these too, even 
use them to involve herself more strongly in life. 

The last two positions in the line again feature the idea of 
combination. As the Outcome and the Result, they go beyond 
the Celtic Cross’s single use of Outcome to sum up the 
reading. The Outcome indicates the likely way things will 
develop. The Result, on the other hand, indicates the person’s 
reaction to this development, or the effect it will have on the 
person’s life. This effect can be either experience or attitude. 
For instance, it can indicate an event or further development 
that comes about because of the Outcome. The Five of Cups 
followed by the Eight of Cups would say that the person loses 
something, or something ends badly, and as a result of this, 
the person decides to leave, go somewhere new, or start a new 
phase in life. 

Or, the Result card can show the Outcome’s effect psy¬ 
chologically. A classic example is the Tower followed by the 
Star, indicating that an explosion in the person's life would 
lead to a release of hope and energy. This example also 
illustrates the potential great importance of seeing not just the 
Outcome, but what comes afterwards. If a reading showed 
only the Tower, and not the Star as a result of it, it would 
leave the subject with a sense of devastation. 

Very often the first line will give such a strong picture that 
the person will need no further information. At other times, 
however, the line may leave the person slightly confused, or 
simply wishing to see the situation from a different point of 
view. In this case, the reader may simply turn over another 
line directly under the first. The positions remain the same, 
and the seven cards still relate to the original small cross that 
set out the basic situation. And yet, because we begin with a 
different starting point, the line enables us to see the situation 
in a different way. 

Besides the new information gained, this method helps 
answer a question many people ask about Tarot readings: l If I 
did it again, different cards would appear, so how can these 
cards really mean anything? The answer is that the new cards 
will look at the same situation from a new point of view. 

Very often, if a reader sets out a Celtic Cross, then mixes the 
cards and does it over again, many of the same or similar 
cards will appear in the second reading. In one pair of 
readings I did for a married couple (with someone else's 



TYPES OF READINGS 


165 


reading in between) six out of the ten cards were the same, 
and the Environment card in the woman’s reading was the 
one used as the Significator for the man. The Work Cycle, 
because it actually prevents the same cards from appearing, 
tends more to show different sides to the question. 

Sometimes the second line will almost mirror the first, 
indicating that the situation is heading so strongly in this 
direction that the person will not easily change it. At other 
times, however, the Outcome-Result will show a definite 
alternative to the first line, and then the reader must look to 
the starting points and to the Work cards. 

A SAMPLE READING 

Once I did a reading for a woman with a jealous lover. 
Theoretically the two did not expect each other to be 
monogamous but the woman knew that if she went with 
someone else - and someone else had come along - her lover 
would be upset. She wanted advice on what to do and we did a 
Work Cycle (see Fig. 63). 

Before the reading I remarked to the woman that the Three 
of Cups often appears in such situations, right side up if it is 
going well, reversed if it is not. The reading began with the 
Three of Cups reversed crossed by the Ace of Cups. The com¬ 
bination showed that despite the jealousies and arguments the 
situation was giving her a lot of happiness, if only she could 
work it out. The first line then began very positively with the 
Ace of Pentacles as the Past, and the Sun as a highly 
optimistic Expectation for the future. Now, the Ace of 
Pentacles, besides showing happiness and pleasure, also 
carries a sense of security, of protected and enclosed situa¬ 
tions. For some time the woman and her lover had not related 
much to other people, building up a tight emotional ‘garden’ 
around themselves as the Ace symbolism shows (they were, in 
fact, living in a remote house in the Welsh countryside). 

The Sun shows the child riding out of a garden. The woman 
hoped now to break loose into wider experiences. And, since 
the Ace of Pentacles had changed in the present to the Ace of 
Cups, at least as a possibility, the cards showed that she had 
begun to let loose, to pour out her emotions regardless of 
security. 

The Work seemed even more to suggest freedom. The Star, 
the Tower, and the World, all trumps from the last line, 




gano* nV 



“WH 


J/U l 


Figure 63(a) 

A sample work cycle reading 













TYPES OF READINGS 


167 


showed first of all the power of the situation. In the centre the 
Tower symbolized the stormy battles and overpowering 
emotions involved. It also suggested the danger of her secure 
relationship being broken down by the lightning bolts of 
jealousy and resentment. Now, the Star here did not par¬ 
ticularly indicate a release coming after the l ower, as it would 
at the end of the line. Rather, it told her that in this difficult 
situation she needed optimism and extreme openness about 
her own desires and emotions. The World also indicated 
optimism, implying the possibility of combining the opposing 
goals of a firm relationship and freedom. 

And yet, despite all these positive influences, the end cards 
looked very unpromising. The Eight of Swords followed by the 
Devil implied that she would make an attempt to break loose 
from the confining qualities of her situation. The Result, 
however, showed she would probably fail to get free. The 
happy and comfortable security of the Ace of Pentacles had 
become changed to Devil-like repression, with her and her 
original lover chained to a situation that neither of them really 
wanted. 

To try for another viewpoint - and also to understand what 
went wrong in the first line - we laid down a second row (see 
Fig. 63(b)). 

This line began more soberly. The Fast Experience showed 
the Seven of Swords, indicating half-hearted attempts to break 
out of the confinement in her life. It implied that previously 
she had never seriously pushed the question or faced the real 
problems involved. This card alone hinted at the reasons for 
the Devil asserting itself - the woman had never tried to work 
out what had to be done, had never confronted her lover or the 
problems between them. 

The second card carried this idea further. Justice showed 
not just a hope for everyone to be ‘fair’ rather than repressive 
or selfish, but even more, a desire to see everything clearly and 
face the truth about herself - what she had done with her life, 
as well as dealing with the reactions of the others. A harsher, 
much tougher attitude than the Sun, Justice symbolized a 
commitment to reality, to creating a real future for herself. 
Notice that the Sun shows a free child, without responsibilities 
- the opposite of Justice. 

The Work in this line - the Nine of Cups, the Four of 
Pentacles, the Wheel reversed - continued the theme of 




Figure 63(b) 

A sample work cycle reading continued 

















TYPES OF READINGS 


169 


realism. The Nine of Cups showed a need to balance the 
emotional pressure with light enjoyment. On the other side 
the Wheel reversed indicated being able to sort through all the 
illusions involved. It showed as well the need to gain control of 
the situation, to refuse/to allow the Wheel of events to simply 
spin her along whichever way it turned. Justice became then 
not just a hope but the primary method of moving away from 
passiveness and subjectivity. 

Of the three cards in the middle, the Four of Pentacles 
proved the most interesting, especially compared with the 
Tower above it. Where the trump had shown her Hying apart 
under the impact of everyone’s charged emotions the Four of 
Pentacles showed her protecting herself. It showed her 
holding on to her own needs, her own understanding of the 
situation, despite the pressure on her from her two lovers. The 
two cards around it indicated ways to do this; first by enjoying 
herself and using that pleasure to hold herself together; and 
second by understanding what had happened and why it had 
happened. The Wheel reversed on the right indicated the need 
- and the opportunity - actually to apply her hope for Justice, 
that is, to work hard at understanding the true meaning of all 
the changes going on in her life. 

In discussing these two lines the woman said that the first 
looked to her like what she should want, and the second what 
she really wanted. People around her talked so much of 
‘freedom’ and open relationships without painful conse¬ 
quences that she felt pressured to want this ‘Sun’ kind of 
behaviour. In reality she cared much more for Justice, the 
truth. The result of the second line’s harsher, more realistic 
starting point showed the sense of what she said. The 
Outcome card was the Queen of Wands, with the Six of 
Wands as the Result. The Queen indicated that by looking 
first to Justice rather than an overly optimistic Sun, the 
woman would find a sense of her own strength and joy. She 
would become more dependent on herself rather than the 
outside situation. From this would come the confidence and 
belief of the Six, an optimism which would carry the other 
people along with her. 

THE TREE OF LIFE 

Any Tarot reading originates in a particular moment; by 



170 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

describing the influences and trends it reaches to past and 
future. The shorter forms tend only to reach far enough to 
illuminate some particular situation. When we begin to know 
the cards better, we may look for some method to give a wider 
picture of a person’s place in the world. The Tree of Life 
reading, which uses the whole deck and is similar in scope to a 
natal astrology chart (though perhaps more narrowly focussed 
on the spiritual/psychological), provides this fuller understan¬ 
ding. 

The image of the Tree comes from the Qabalah. We can see 
it in the Rider pack on the Ten of Pentacles, drawn in the 
following way: 

O 

o o 

o o 

o 

o o 

o 
o 

In meditation with the Major Arcana, we use primarily the 
twenty-two positions or links between the different Sephiroth 
(the ten positions). In divination we use the Sephiroth them¬ 
selves, adapting their classical names and connotations to 
enable them to serve as positions in a spread, similar to the 
Basis, Self, etc. of a Celtic Cross, but much wider in scope. 
The Qabalist titles and descriptions are necessarily abstract; 
they contain a mystic description of the universe’s creation 
and structure, as well as a way towards a greater knowledge of 
God. Therefore those Tarot readers like myself, who have 
wished to use this powerful image for divination have chosen 
more mundane meanings to correspond to the positions. 

THE STRUCTURE OF THE TREE 

Before going through these meanings, we should look briefly 
at the Tree’s structure. There are two basic patterns within 
the Tree, shown as follows: 



TYPES OF READINGS 


171 



Diagram (a) emphasizes levels of awareness. The top 
triangle remains closest to God, from whom the original point 
of light emanated to create the Hrst Sephirah. As the light of 
creation travelled through the different triangles it became 
more and more diluted, or even for some people corrupted, 
until in the last, single, Sephirah it became contained within 
the physical world of fiesh and rock and water. (Such a brief 
description of course greatly distorts Qabalist philosophy. I 
give it here only to show something of the background for the 
Tree of Life reading.) 

The concept of a downward descent of the light is used in 
divination in the following way. Since we wish to describe a 
person’s life we look at each triangle as an aspect of that 
person, using a tripartite system similar to the three lines of 
the Major. Arcana. The top triangle signifies a person’s 
spiritual existence, pointing upwards to the subject's highest 
potential. The middle triangle pointing downwards to 
manifestation, represents the ways in which the person deals 
with the outer world, the practical matters of life. The bottom 
triangle again points downwards but this time into the 
hidden areas of the self. It stands for unconscious drives and 
imaginative energy. We can also refer to the triangles as 
super-conscious, conscious- and unconscious. 

The bottom position, standing apart, represents not a 
personal quality as do the others, but the outer world in which 
the person lives. We can think of it as similar to Environment 
in the Celtic Cross, but on a much wider level. 

Diagram (b) derives from the idea of polarity or opposing 
forces. In Qabalah the right and left sides of the Tree signify 
the way in which God directs existence. The right pillar, that 


172 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


of Grace, tends towards expansion. Its qualities enlarge and 
open out. The left pillar, called Severity, contracts, emphasiz¬ 
ing qualities that restrict. The one gives, the other takes away, 
thereby maintaining the conservation of energy. But if only 
those two forces existed the universe would swing wildly back 
and forth, constantly expanding and contracting. Therefore, 
the middle pillar stands for Reconciliation, a blending and 
harmonizing of the two principles. Notice that the last 
Sephirah, symbolizing physical existence, falls in the middle 
pillar. In the material world the archetypal elements merge 
into a stable form. 

The image of the three columns appears in less abstract 
form in the Rider pack version (as well as a number of others) 
of the High Priestess. The dark pillar stands for Severity, the 
light pillar for Grace. The High Priestess herself fulfils the 
function of Reconciliation, balancing the yin and yang 
opposites within perfect stillness. 

Just as we need a ‘practical' version of the triangles, so our 
purpose requires a more diredt interpretation of the three 
pillars. We therefore use a recurring pattern for each triangle. 
The position on the left tends towards the problems arising 
from that level, the one on the right depicts the benefits or 
positive direction. The position in the middle describes the 
quality itself, where the oppositions are blended together. 
These distinctions will become clearer when we look at the 
individual Sephiroth. 

One further point about the structure. Qabalists picture the 
path made by the light of creation as a zigzag, sometimes 
referred to as the lightning bolt of God. Beginning beyond the 
first Sephirah (for God’s true essence remains unknowable 
and transcendent) it runs like this: 



TYPES OF READINGS 


173 


In meditation we use this image primarily to help us 
advance through the Sephiroth towards union with that 
aspect of God we experience in mystic ecstasy. In other words, 
through meditative discipline we travel backwards along the 
lightning bolt, as if we were unravelling the universe to get to 
its source. The lightning striking the Tower in the Major 
Arcana symbolizes this light of illumination. 

Another form of meditation, mixed with ceremonial magic, 
attempts to follow the lightning downwards, or rather to call it 
down upon the person. Called ‘Practical Qabalah', this use of 
Qabalistic principles for magic bases much of its work on the 
idea that proper ritual and meditation can bring a lightning 
flash, not just of understanding, but of great power onto the 
magician. The person following these occult practices is 
warned not to seek this power for personal gain but only for 
projects serving the community. (The warnings against 
misuse given in magical grimoires sometimes strike one as 
similar to the warnings on pornographic books: ‘This material 
is for medical use only’.) 

THE LAYOUT 

In divination we follow the lightning pattern in a much more 
mundane way, as the method of laying out the cards. To do a 
Tree of Life reading the reader first removes the Significator as 
in the other methods, and places it high on the reading surface 
(obviously a lot of room is needed to lay out seventy-eight 
cards). When the subject has shuffled and cut the deck, the 
reader takes the cards and begins laying them face down 
according to the pattern: 

1 


3 2 

5 4 


6 


8 


7 


9 


10 


174 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


The Significator remains exposed above the reading. When 
the first ten cards are placed the reader lays down another ten 
on top of them, and so on, until each place contains a pack of 
seven cards. Now, removing the Significator from the deck 
leaves seventy-seven cards, or eleven times seven. Therefore, 
the reader will end up with seven extra cards. Many Qabalists 
speak of an ‘invisible' eleventh Sephirah, known as Daath, or 
Knowledge. Usually Qabalists will place this extra Sephirah 
in the middle pillar, between the first and sixth Sephiroth, 
that is, between the top and middle triangles. In Tarot 
readings we place it to the side or on the bottom, and read it 
after ail the others. The fact that we do not place it down in 
order with the other cards but simply use the ‘left over' seven 
cards emphasizes its uniqueness. The Daath pack does not 
belong in any of the general areas of influence. Some readers 
see it as signifying the immediate future. 

When I first began doing the Tree of Life readings I used 
the Daath pack as a general commentary, an extra bit of infor¬ 
mation applying to the reading as a whole. 1 have since found 
a more specific meaning for it, that of Transformation. 

In Volume One I described the idea, derived both from 
Qabalah and modern quantum mechanics, that any change 
comes not as gradual alteration, but as a jump from one state 
to another. We may lead up to changes with years of gradual 
preparation but the actual change occurs as a leap across an 
abyss. We cease being one thing and become another. In these 
moments of transformation we can sometimes sense the essen¬ 
tial Nothing underlying all fixed existence. Some people 
describe Daath as the aspect which sense this truth of the 
abyss. Others point out that Daath links Wisdom (Sephirah 
2) and Understanding (Sephirah 3) through its qualities of 
awareness and reflection. Indeeed, ‘Daath’ means ‘Know¬ 
ledge’. 

With these meanings in mind I found it worthwhile to use 
the Daath pack as a description of the means by which a 
person changes. Related to the whole reading it emphasizes 
the connections a person makes betweep the different levels. 
The different Sephiroth/positions tend po show distinct levels 
and conditions of being. The Daath pack helps us see how we 
move between them. Therefore, the name I have given it is 
Transformation. 



TYPES OF READINGS 


175 


THE POSITIONS AND MEANINGS 

What then are the specific Sephiroth positions? The following 
list is my own, based partly on suggestions from various com¬ 
mentaries. I offer it as a possible system and a guide. Readers 
who want to work extensively with Tree of Life divination will 
want to formulate their own positions. 

Using the number pattern shown on p. 173, the positions are: 

1 Kether or Crown - Highest Spiritual Development 

By this we mean the truest and best qualities of the person and 
the ways in which she or he reaches these levels. The Crown 
will not always show very positive or joyous qualities. Some 
people reach their best development through struggle or 
sadness. I remember one reading where the l ower occupied 
the centre of the Kether line, with the Star two cards away 
from it. The person found it very difficult to develop in any 
stable way. He tended always to go through cycles of tension, 
explosion, and release, a theme echoed all the way at the 
bottom of the reading, when the Devil appeared in the centre 
of his Daath line. 

2 Hokmah or Wisdom 

The second Sephirah, Hokmah or Wisdom, stands for 
Creative Intelligence, the ways in which the person moves 
towards the goal of Highest Development. Usually related to 
the Crown line it emphasizes the process of development 
rather than the result. For example, if the Sun appears in the 
Crown line we would interpret it as joy and freedom, 
appreciated for themselves. If it appeared in Creative Intelli¬ 
gence we would think of those qualities as the means towards 
whatever we had seen in the Crown. Like the first line, 
Creative Intelligence may include unpleasant or difficult 
cards, if these are what the person uses to grow. 

When such cards do appear it is important to consider them 
not only in relation to their function - to see how the person 
can use them creatively — but also in relation to the other cards 
in the line. For example, suppose the Nine of Wands appeared 
in Hokmah. The reader would first emphasize the strength 
and determination rather than the rigidity inherent in the 
card. But suppose the Four of Wands appeared in the line as 
well. Then the Nine has to be seen as part of a cycle of defence 
and openness, each of them helping and feeding on each other. 



176 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


And because they appear in the second line of the Spirit 
triangle, we would think of them not simply as a cycle repeat- 
ing the same experience over and over, but as a spiral, leading 
to whatever images appeared in Kether. 

It should become obvious that the Tree of Life reading 
requires a good deal of experience with the cards and with 
divination to work properly. Not only must the reader 
interpret seven cards for every position, but each position 
must relate to the others. 

3 Binah or Understanding 

Completing the triangle is Binah, Understanding. In Qabalah 
the difference between Wisdom and Understanding refers 
primarily to the manner in which the soul contemplates God 
and itself. In the more mundane experience of a reading we 
can think of Understanding as those experiences which hold 
us back from development, or Sorrows and Burdens. Here the 
cards show the person’s restrictions and this time the more 
positive images need to be adapted to the terms of the line. At 
the same time the original title, Understanding, leads us to 
consider how these restrictions can be overcome. 

The middle triangle stands for the more ordinary aspects of 
life, and here we begin with the two sides and end in the 
middle. 

4 Gevurah or Judgement 

Opposite Worldly Gains we find Gevurah, or Judgement, 
standing for Difficulties. These may include anything from 
money troubles to loneliness. In one reading the Queen of 
Swords in this line indicated to me that the woman was a 
widow. 

5 Hesed or Mercy 

The fifth Sephirah stands for Worldly Gains, which means 
what the person will achieve in life in terms of work, home, 
money, friends, etc. Usually the line will emphasize areas of 
success rather than failure. It may also indicate the ways in 
which worldly gains affect the person’s character. The three 
triangles form one pattern, a fact that usually becomes more 
and more apparent as the reading develops and connections 
appear more strongly. Therefore, the mundane concerns of 
Worldly Gains will often reflect the spiritual awareness of 



TYPES OF READINGS 


177 


Creative Force above it. And understanding the lower posi¬ 
tions on the Free will often prove the key to going back and 
interpreting the higher ones. 

6 Tifereth or Beauty 

The point of the triangle stands for Tifereth, Beauty. In 
readings I use this position to indicate Health. Using the 
Tarot to diagnose specific physical problems can be a very 
tricky operation, though suggestions for doing this exist, 
usually linking the cards to astrological aspects or other 
systems. I have found it better to get a more general picture 
from the line, looking not just at physical condition but also 
emotional, spiritual health. 

One recommendation - observe which elements dominate. 
Strong Wands suggest good general health through the 
person’s life, though of course such Wands as the Ten or tfie 
Nine, as well as reversed Wands, might indicate the opposite. 
Cups and Swords tend to show the emotional and spiritual 
condition of the person, while Pentacles often show weaker 
health or the need to take care of the body. The Five, for 
instance, would be a definite warning. A predominance of 
Major cards in the line is more difficult to interpret, depen¬ 
ding for meaning on which cards appear. Strength, of course, 
would indicate good general health, Temperance would 
indicate illness averted by caution, while the Devil might show- 
sickness, or hypochondria. Sometimes a single Major card can 
symbolize some special situation that has appeared or will 
appear in the person’s life. Time sequences in this line, and in 
the whole tree, remain a difficult problem, especially for the 
beginning reader. 

The third triangle deals with the Unconscious, particularly 
the imaginative and sexual drives. In Volume One we looked 
at the idea that super-consciousness, or spiritual energy and 
awareness, consists of the unconscious transformed and made 
conscious. Thus, the Tree will often show very strong connec¬ 
tions between the top and bottom triangles, with the middle 
level - the person’s conscious experiences - forming a link 
between the two. 

Earlier 1 described the subconscious as the repressed side of 
the ego, distinct from the unconscious, or life energy of the 
person. None of these triangles deals specifically with this 
sense of the subconscious. Rather, this hidden material can 



178 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


appear throughout the reading, showing problems, aggres¬ 
sion, or unfulfilled desires. Unfortunately the vast ness of this 
subject prevents me giving detailed examples. (1 apologize for 
indulging in something resembling the dark hints one often 
finds in occult books: ‘Here 1 may say no more about this.’) I 
will only point out that we can see the subconscious at work in 
the seeming contradictions of, say, the Two of Swords appear¬ 
ing as a block in the line of Creative Force. 

7 Netzach or Eternity 

The seventh Sephirah, Netzach, means Eternity. 1 have used it 
in this system to stand for Discipline, the ways in which the 
person can put her or his imagination to work. By ‘discipline’ 
I do not mean the strict sort of rules that the word normally 
conjures up. Instead I mean the deliberate training and direc¬ 
tion symbolized in the hooded hawk of the Nine of Pentacles. 
Creative power under such discipline becomes enhanced and 
freed rather than weakened or closed in. For it is a quality of 
the unconscious that its benefit in our lives increases the more 
we direct it. This is something known by most artists, as well 
as by people who have worked seriously in the occult. 

Most people who do not deliberately work with the uncon¬ 
scious energy simply find that it stays dormant. Their lives 
may seem flat, or they may think of themselves as lacking any 
creativity. For some, however, the unconscious is so strong it 
can break through on its own, bringing chaos or even 
madness. I remember one reading (not a Free of Life) done for 
a man who had experienced a serious nervous breakdown 
after a series of strong psychic experiences. In the reading the 
Nine of Pentacles appeared, but also the Hermit, telling him 
that a proper teacher would train this energy that had erupted 
so painfully into his life. Discipline, in its best sense, stands for 
the process of raising the unconscious and transforming it into 
creative energy. 

Because most people do not find themselves drawn, or 
pushed, to psychic or occult work, we usually find more 
ordinary concerns reflected in Discipline. It may refer to 
artistic work, but not necessarily. For some people, the uncon¬ 
scious expresses itself in a career or in creating a loving home 
for her or his family. The important thing about the line is 
that it shows the training or work necessary for the person to 
do something with creative potential. Such blocked cards as 


TYPES OF READINGS 


179 


the Eight of Swords appearing in this line may hold great 
meaning for the entire reading, for so much of our lives 
depends on the release of unconscious energy. 

8 Hod or Reverberation 

On the other side of the triangle we find Hod, or Reverbera¬ 
tion. The divination title for this line - Love and Lust - will 
usually make the subject sit up and listen very closely. This 
line shows the person's sexual drive and the way these urges 
work in practice - in short, what the person wants and what 
he or she gets. Depending on the person this line too may 
provide the key to all the others, though maybe not as often as 
we might expect. 

Notice that Love and Lust comes on the restrictive side of 
the Tree, while Discipline appears on the side of expansion. 
This construction reflects the fact that our sexual drives often 
dominate us, making us do things we would otherwise avoid, 
or preventing us from releasing potentials in other areas. 
Discipline, on the other hand, makes use of the imaginative 
energy, leading it in the direction of transformation to the 
spiritual. Sexual cards may appear not in Love and Lust but 
in Discipline, suggesting that the person develops through 
love, in the manner symbolized by the angel rising between 
the man and woman in the Lovers. For such people love is as 
much a discipline as a temptation or an indulgence. 

I should add that Love and Lust appearing on the side of 
Restriction does not require us to interpret it as a problem. If 
the cards show satisfaction and freedom, then certainly we 
should interpret them that way. 

9 Yesod or Foundation 

The ninth Sephirah, Yesod or Foundation, stands for 
Imagination, in many ways the true foundation of the self. For 
the majority of people, who do not go through programmes of 
self-creation the unconscious never does become conscious. It 
remains both the source and the driving force of the per¬ 
sonality. We glimpse this energy in such activities as dreams, 
fantasies, desires - in other words, what we commonly call the 
imagination. By calling the Foundation line Imagination we 
actually mean more than such manifestations. The term here 
stands for the energy itself, coiled beneath the conscious per¬ 
sonality and giving off flashes to the outer world. The cards in 


180 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


this line show the shape and mood of the person's uncon¬ 
scious. Often they will relate very directly to the line of 
Highest Development way above it. 

10 Malkuth or Kingdom 

Below Imagination comes Malkuth. or Kingdom, meaning the 
World around the person. Here we see the external influences, 
other people, situations both personal and social/political. 
Usually, of course, indications of these outside forces will 
appear throughout the reading. In one reading the Emperor, 
as the woman’s domineering husband, appeared in the centre 
of her Health line, that is, in the exact centre of the Tree. 
However, the last line emphasizes outer influences, showing 
also the effect upon the subject. We can look at it as similar to 
the Environment of the Cross, but greatly expanded. 

Daath 

Finally we come to Daath. Though we set it aside from the 
Tree when dealing out the cards, many readers will want to 
lay it out below Malkuth, thereby producing a symmetrical 
Tree as well as graphically showing how connections underlie 
all positions. 

Sometimes these cards will clearly refer to one particular 
situation shown above in one of the three triangles. Usually, 
we do not give the Daath cards a specific function as we do 
with the other lines. Like the Fool in the Major Arcana, it 
moves between all of them, joining things together, helping 
the general pattern become clearer in the reader's and sub¬ 
ject’s minds. 

The image of the entire Tree, seventy-eight brightly 
coloured cards, can be an astounding sight. I have sometimes 
taken photographs of it for myself and for the subject. I would 
recommend readers to make a chart of the Tree, marking the 
positions and the individual cards. Vlost people also find it 
valuable to make a cassette recording which they can play 
back later to help assimilate the tremendous amount of infor¬ 
mation. 

If the reader and the subject have begun a regular 
programme of readings, then a Tree of Life, written and 
recorded, can help make the readings more effective. Often it 
works best not to do the Tree immediately, but rather to do 
one or two small readings first to get an idea of the issues in 



TYPES OF READINGS 


181 


the person’s life. A Tree of Life will then provide a comprehen¬ 
sive view of the subject, which both people can use as a 
reference in later readings. 

To do such a reading requires a great knowledge of the 
cards and of the ways in which they mesh together. 
Remember that the astrologer doing a natal chart is usually 
able to construct the chart ahead of time and consider its 
various qualities before having to explain it to the subject. But 
a Tree of Life reading, like any Tarot reading, works best 
when we interpret the cards as we lay them out. 

Remember also that each line contains seven cards. Each 
line is itself a reading. Sometimes the seven cards appear as a 
group of individual experiences. More often, a pattern will 
form within the line. Our understanding of it may move from, 
say, left to right almost like a story; or we might focus on the 
centre card as a dominant theme, with the surrounding cards 
interpreted partly according to their positions. I have often 
found symmetry an important clue - cards one and seven 
relating to each other, two and six, etc. Or. the three cards on 
the right may show one characteristic, while the ones on the 
left some other, possibly contradictory one. Each line carries 
its own movement, its own perfection. 



Chapter 7 

How to Use Tarot Readings 


The value of a Tarot reading, at least for the subject, depends 
on what he or she does with it afterwards. For those people 
who come to a reader out of curiosity or as a game the reading 
will probably pass by their lives, like a show they watch from 
the audience. But this show concerns them, and if the reading 
means anything real, they will want to put it to some practical 
use. 

First of all, the reader and the subject cannot use the 
reading at all until they understand it. Therefore the reader 
must develop skills of interpretation, and the best way to do 
this is to practise. When you begin do not assume a great 
depth of knowledge; just keep at it. Do not worry if you cannot 
see how things fit together, or become confused by all the 
possible interpretations of some single card. After a while you 
will find that you notice things that would have slid past you 
when you first began. 

Study. Learn the meanings described in whatever books 
strike you as valuable. Then begin the process of making your 
own book. Get a good notebook and record your descriptions, 
feelings, and experiences for each card. You can do this in 
words, pictures, diagrams, whatever method means some¬ 
thing to you. In the same or another book record the readings 
you do and what you have learned froirnhem. If some reading 
teaches you a new point about some sjtigle card or combina¬ 
tion or the whole deck, record this as well. 

Do not take for granted that you know what you have 
already learned. We all carry certain biases and as time goes 
by we tend to remember some meanings and forget others. 
Often a card will make no sense because we insist on 
interpreting it in a certain way strictly from habit, when 




HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


183 


another, forgotten meaning will clear it immediately. 
Therefore, from time to time, even after you think you know 
all the cards by heart, look back on your notes and your books. 
You will be surprised at how much you relearn. 

Keeping a notebook serves another purpose. As described 
above Tarot readings help teach us a balance between intui¬ 
tion and action, the High Priestess and the Magician. A 
notebook is one practical way to develop this balance, for it 
combines your own impressions with the ideas you have 
learned from published texts. Making your own book is 
especially important if you are the sort of person who believes 
what you learn from a published book or a teacher. You are 
the reader, and in any situation the cards lie before you and no 
one else. Without the ability to respond instinctively to the 
pictures you will never be able to choose between the possible 
interpretations, let alone find a new meaning just right for that 
reading. 

We all possess the ability to respond intuitively, but like any 
other faculty, this kind of perception requires training and 
development. A notebook will help here too. Besides giving 
you something permanent to look at later, the very act of 
writing them down will give your ideas more substance. You 
will also find the original ideas will be greatly extended as new 
points occur to you while you write them down. 

You can also train the intuition by spending time with the 
pictures, looking at them, mixing them, telling stories with 
them, above all, forgetting what they are supposed to mean. 
Forget the symbolism as you pay attention to the colours, the 
shapes, the very feel and weight of the cards. 

As the reader becomes more competent the readings will 
become more valuable. The primary thing we get from any 
reading is information, but the information can be of different 
kinds. For people with an awareness of the spiritual undercur¬ 
rents shaping all our lives the Tarot can show what particular 
shape these currents are taking at that moment. For others, 
readings may show the likely developments from some par¬ 
ticular situation or decision. Look for a new job, start a love 
affair, continue writing a novel - these are all mundane issues, 
seemingly far from the mystic concerns of the Major Arcana. 
Nevertheless, these are the things most people look at in Tarot 
readings; and in fact they are also the ways in which we truly 
develop, because they are the ways w'e involve ourselves in life. 


184 SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 

They form the reality rising out of the spiritual undercurrents. 
A Tarot reading can help us examine the consequences of 
such actions and decisions. 

Tarot readings, then, can give us information. But to act on 
that information, especially if it goes against our desires, 
remains very difficult. 

We can think up endless dodges to deny the validity of 
Tarot readings. On one level we tell ourselves, 1 It’s only a pack 
of cards.’ But even those who do not dismiss the Tarot’s pre¬ 
dictions so easily may think, ‘Now that I know what it says I 
can make sure it won’t work out that way.’ Around the time I 
first began to use Tarot cards I consulted them on something I 
wanted to do but recognized was dangerous. The cards 
indicated disaster and spelled out quite clear the shape that 
disaster would take. I then said to myself, ‘Well, now that I’ve 
seen the dangers I can make sure I avoid them.’ I went ahead 
with what I wanted to do, and the situation worked out, in 
detail, the way the cards had predicted. Not having learned 
my lesson I read the cards again, hoping not for the truth, but 
for some reassuring message. I was using a book of meanings 
at that time, and when I looked up the Basis card the book 
gave as an interpretation, ‘Failure to follow' good advice’. 

The problem with making a decision based on a Tarot 
reading is that we never know how it would have turned out 
otherwise. Suppose a student considers leaving college and the 
cards advise strongly against it. If she follows the reading she 
will never know w'hat might have happened if she had followed 
her desire instead. Of course the whole point of the reading is 
that it does tell her what would have happened. But, she will 
always wonder, suppose it was not true? A prediction, 
especially from a pack of cards, can never carry the same 
impact as actual experience. Curiosity alone can make us do 
disastrous things. 

It takes courage to overcome curiosity and desire. Some 
years ago I read that the poet Allen Ginsberg and a woman 
lover of his were thinking of having a baby together. They did 
a reading, with the Tarot or the I Ching, I forget which, and 
got a negative prediction. They gave up the idea. I do not 
know how much they really wanted a child, but 1 remember 
admiring their strength in resisting the desire. I once did not 
go to a potentially valuable conference because the cards 
showed me unpleasant consequences. 1 was able to recognize 



HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


183 


the truth of what the cards indicated, at least in regard to 
what 1 would have contributed to the situation. Even so, I 
found it difficult not to ignore the information and go ahead. 

We can think up some truly marvellous excuses for avoiding 
the obvious truth of a reading. If we respect the cards too 
much to simply declare them nonsense, we will often look for 
certain ‘false' images to discredit the whole reading. Does the 
Outcome card not seem to fit the situation? Rather than 
interpret it in the light of the others, we will write off the whole 
reading. 

Some books advise readers never to read for themselves 
because of the lack of objectivity. For a long time I went to a 
friend for readings and she to me, because neither of us trusted 
ourselves to interpret our own cards honestly. When I started 
doing my own readings I still found it hard to overcome 
various mental tricks to avoid unpleasant images. My 
favourite worked as follows: I could not ignore the cards I did 
not like or simply declare them untrue or exaggerated. That 
would have seemed too obvious. Therefore I looked in the 
reading for some very positive image, such as the Ace of Cups, 
and said to myself, ‘Well, that can't be true, nothing so good 
could come out of this mess.’ And then I would dismiss the 
whole reading on the grounds that if this one card made no 
sense none of the others did. Another trick I discovered myself 
doing was to lay out the cards very casually, so if something 
bad came up I could think, ‘Well, I didn't really mean it, I 
didn’t do it seriously.' I could only read for myself when I 
began treating the readings in the same way I would anyone 
else’s, mixing the cards carefully, working at the images, 
trying to get some direction for action (or inaction). 

A reading will not always give a clear yes or no answer to a 
question. It may show simply a complex of trends and 
influences. Sometimes the reading does not involve a choice 
because of an ongoing situation which cannot easily be 
avoided. Then specific images and meanings become very 
important. The Tarot can help us pinpoint the important 
elements in the situation, the ones that need the most work to 
change, or bring about, the predicted outcome. 

People may use the idea, ‘Now that I know what it says, I 
can do something about it ’ as an excuse to follow their desires. 
Nevertheless, the statement remains true. Maybe we have a 
very pessimistic attitude or an exaggerated fear, or an 



186 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


unreasonable hope. To recognize such things helps us gain a 
clearer perspective. Maybe our past experience governs our 
behaviour or confuses what we expect from the future. 
Knowing this consciously can put us on the way to overcom¬ 
ing it. Or maybe the cards will show us someone else’s 
jealousy or vindictiveness; we can then take steps to free our¬ 
selves from that person's influence. Or, if the cards show love 
and support from someone, w’e know' we can trust that person. 

All these things require some sort of response to make them 
real. We cannot expect to make use of a person’s friendship if 
we do not make ourselves open to it. Wherever possible the 
reader should try to point out to the subject definite steps 
w'hich can be taken to make best use of the information. If the 
reader cannot recommend a concrete course of action then he 
or she should point out what area the subject needs to work 
on. 

Above all, the reader must learn to form a coherent pattern 
from the reading. Often, beginning readers will learn the 
cards and advance to the point where they can skilfully 
interpret each image in its specific position. At the end the 
subject finds him or herself with a jumble of different points 
and no clear idea of how' it all fits together. A good reader can 
sum up what the reading says in a few sentences. Usually I 
will try to do this at both the beginning and end of the 
reading, impressing on the subject’s mind the most important 
points. Does the Environment support or hinder? Do the 
person’s Expectations help or hurt? Will the Outcome bring a 
valuable Result? The subject needs these questions answered, 
not just in all their complexity, but also in as simple a way as 
possible. And how does one thing come out of another? How 
does the past help form the future? What does the person con¬ 
tribute to the overall situation? 

Along with coherency comes the need for a positive 
approach. It is not enough to depict things as they are. The 
person wants to know what to do, what not to do. If the cards 
show something good, the subject still needs to know how to 
help this along. And if they show' disaster the reader must say 
so, but can also say what, if anything, the person can do. 
What brings about this unpleasant Outcome? Can these 
influences be altered or avoided? How can the person coun¬ 
teract, or at least cushion it? What elements show other 
possibilities? Can we look for anything good to come out of it? 




HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


187 


If the Outcome arises from some particular course of action, 
should the person abandon it? When we do a Tarot reading 
for someone we take on the responsibility of trying to send that 
person in a positive direction. 

Beyond specific suggestions of do this rather than that, lies 
a wider area of possible action derived from the ways the suits 
balance each other. In the introduction to each suit we con¬ 
sidered its problems and the way we could ‘add’ other suits/ 
elements. In practice, this adding is often difficult to achieve, 
because it means breaking the pattern shown in the reading 
itself. For this very reason, however, it is worth trying in situa¬ 
tions where the reading shows a dead end if the person stays 
with the elements given. 

The most direct way to bring in an outside influence 
involves simple suggestions. If the reading indicates a need for 
the grounding influence of Pentacles, the subject can try doing 
more physical things, such as sports or gardening, or paying 
more attention to more mundane activities, such as work or 
study or keeping busy around the house. If the reading shows 
a need for the watery qualities of Cups, then the reader may 
emphasize the person’s dreams and fantasies, and may 
suggest activities such as meditation or drawing. A person can 
fill a need for Wands by becoming more active physically, 
competing with other people, or starting new projects. And a 
need for Swords would call for a sober, carefully thought out 
approach to the person’s situation. The important thing about 
these recommendations is that they reach beyond the reading. 
They deal with the cards that do not appear as well as the 
ones that do. Therefore, beginning readers should use this 
method carefully, lest they assume too much knowledge and 
control on their part. 


MEDITATION 

So far, we have considered practical responses to the informa¬ 
tion gained from a reading. But a Tarot reading is not the 
words describing it; it is rather a series of pictures. And the 
most direct response to a reading depends on working with the 
pictures themselves. For people who know the cards well, or 
for people with some experience in meditation, it becomes 
possible to work directly with the images to help bring about 
the effects associated with that card. There is nothing vague or 



188 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


mysterious about this process. It requires concentration as 
well as instinctive feeling, and it does not replace practical 
steps. On the contrary, it helps to make those steps more 
accessible. For if the card Strength appears in a reading as 
something we need in our life, why not let the card itself help 
give it to us? 

Besides actual meditation I often recommend to people that 
they carry a certain card around with them, and try to remain 
conscious of it being there, taking it out from time to time, 
looking at it, thinking about what it means. The constant 
awareness helps keep the entire reading in focus as well. 

Meditation can also help to bring in new influences from 
outside the reading. Suppose the Star does not appear in the 
reading, but as the reader we think it should. In other words, 
the archetype of the Star seems to us to symbolize exactly 
those qualities the person needs. Now, we can show the person 
the card and discuss the ideas associated with it. It is more 
valuable, however, to give the person an actual experience of 
the card. 

Briefly, the method works as follows. We begin by leading 
the person into a meditative state; help him or her to relax, to 
breathe deeply, to release all the thoughts and tensions clut¬ 
tering up consciousness. When the subject has reached this 
level (and with a little experience we can sense this), we then 
begin to give suggestions leading into the card. T he sugges¬ 
tions may be a description of the card to set the scene (with 
the Empress, for example, ‘You are in a garden full of flowers, 
with a river running alongside it. There is a woman lying on a 
couch ...') or more simply, basic images such as sun, water, 
wind, that belong to the card’s archetypal qualities. 

Usually it is best to keep these opening suggestions as 
simple as possible. If we describe the card we should not try to 
include all the details. Let the subject create the actual 
impressions. We function only as a guide to urge the person 
along. 

We can keep the experience on this basic level or we can 
develop it further. We can give more complex suggestions, and 
start asking questions - ‘What do you see?' ‘What is the 
person doing?' ‘Can you hear anything?’ - so that the subject 
begins to extend the fantasy beyond our directions. Sometimes 
the meditation will allow the person to experience the archety¬ 
pal elements in a new way. At other times it may go even 



HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


189 


further; the images will transform themselves, releasing some 
intense awareness from inside the person. A number of times I 
have led a group meditation with a elass, and afterwards have 
had someone tell me that the meditation has allowed him or 
her to resolve some longstanding problem or emotional block. 
Such breakthroughs, of course, came from the people them¬ 
selves. They were ready to go beyond their current state to a 
new level, had been ready for some time, but could not bring 
themselves to cross over. The meditation allowed them to do 
this without realizing it until it had happened. 

Meditation can also help a person develop a deeper and 
more personal sense of some particular card. Once, I did a 
meditation with someone who found the Emperor a hard 
remote image, almost frightening, and certainly unattractive. 
I began by setting the scene for her - a stony desert by a 
narrow image. This then opened out to a vast plain filled with 
the Emperor’s subjects. When 1 pushed her to describe these 
people she saw them all hooded - that is, faceless - and bent 
over, working on robot-like tasks. The Emperor's fierce 
expression kept the people from daring to look at him. The 
people symbolized the woman, and her unwillingness to go 
more deeply into the card. 

I then told the woman to do just that - not just look at the 
Emperor but go right up to him. When her fantasy-self did 
this a strange thing happened. The Emperor changed from a 
despot to a kind of harmless puppet, w'hile from behind him 
rose a vast ghost or spirit figure, beautiful and benevolent. The 
woman’s fear and reaction against the social structure of the 
Emperor had given way to a sense of the spiritual structure 
underlying the universe. 

This experience not only gave the woman a much greater 
sense of the Emperor’s deeper significance; it had the same 
effect on me. With her I went beyond the image of the 
Emperor as society to the more occult meaning of the card as 
symbolizing the cosmos itself. Whenever we give someone a 
meditation we take part in it ourselves. 

At the same time, we can only lead such an exercise with 
another person after we have gained some experience our¬ 
selves. If you are a beginner in meditation you should realize 
above all that meditation tends to work better the more you do 
it. If you have never tried it before, it may have a powerful 
effect the first time you try. More likely, however, you will find 


190 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


it difficult to concentrate, or will simply become physically 
uncomfortable trying to sit without moving. Keep at it, and if 
possible go to a teacher for lessons in such basics as breathing 
and posture. 

I am not going to recommend any specific techniques for 
putting yourself into a meditative state. There are a great 
many books and classes on this subject, and many people will 
find they need to try a few before they find the best method 
that works best for them. Though most of these techniques 
will adapt themselves to work with Tarot, those which involve 
visualization (as compared to those emphasizing chanting or 
total emptiness of mind) will transfer most easily. 

Different people use different methods to bring the card into 
their meditations. Some start with the eyes closed and do not 
look at the card until they have reached a certain state; others 
do the opposite. They begin by staring at the card until they 
reach a certain unity with it, then close their eyes and let the 
images continue from there. Others hold the card at arm's 
length, then draw it slowly towards the solar plexus, ‘bringing 
it into the aura'. 

However you begin I recommend working with the images 
and the feelings arising from the card instead of the symbolism 
you have learned to associate with it. Let the picture affect 
you, allow your reactions to it to surface and then slide away 
from you before they block any further experience. I have 
sometimes found it useful to stare without focussing at the 
card, so that the symbols and forms dissolve into colour and 
shape. 

At other times, particularly when giving a meditation to 
someone else, I will ignore the actual picture and suggest some 
scene associated with it. For instance, for the Fool, instead of 
that particular person in his multi-coloured suit, I will use a 
simpler image of a mountain top and clear sunlight. It is more 
important to set the person, or yourself, in the scene than to 
follow the card exactly. 

Movement or posture can also help to evoke some cards. 
For the Magician you might stand or sit with one arm raised 
‘towards heaven’ and the other pointing at the earth. 

Sometimes the meditation will go nu further than an 
awareness of the card, or a discovery of new ideas about it, 
and about your self. At other times you will find yourself 
‘entering’ the card, that is, finding yourself within the image, 



HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


191 


acting out some situation with the figures in the picture. This 
may happen overwhelmingly, so that you find your whole 
being there instead of here. More likely you will experience it as 
a fantasy unrolling before you, with an awareness at the same 
time of yourself sitting on the floor or lying on the bed. Either 
way, it is difficult to describe in words these intense 
experiences. They carry both a personal and archetypal 
meaning, for while the cards bear pictures of deepest meaning, 
what we do with those images comes out of our own needs and 
experiences. 

Various people, such as F. D. Ouspensky and Joseph 
D’Agostino, have attempted to write down their own Tarot 
meditations as an example or guide. For me these descriptions 
do not really convey the experience of the card coming alive, of 
becoming a part of the picture. Each person will experience 
different things in these moments. For instance, with Strength 
you might find yourself running with the lion, or else the 
woman’s flowering wreath might wrap around you, or you 
might become the woman herself or the lion; or even, as 
happened to me once, the woman might release the lion to 
leap at you and claw and bite you. 

Here are some more hints. If you do not have a particular 
image you wish to work with, you can do a reading or simply 
go through the deck until a card grips you and pulls you into 
it. Then place it before you and begin with your normal 
meditation. Become aware of the picture, putting aside any 
ideas you might have about it. Keep your eyes closed or 
opened, depending on what works for you; most people find 
that at least when the fantasy starts they prefer their eyes 
closed. Try to see and feel yourself in that place with those 
people and animals. 

As mentioned earlier, if you are giving a meditation to 
someone else you should give them suggestions to get them 
involved with the image. You may find, after some experi¬ 
ments, that you want to use such suggestions on yourself. For 
the Hanged Man I often use the image of climbing a great 
tree, stopping at different levels to look at the land and the sea 
beneath me, the sky and the stars above. Or you might simply 
want a description of the card that you can listen to with your 
eyes closed. If you wish to use such guides you might find it 
valuable to make a tape ahead of time so that your conscious 
mind does not have to occupy itself with remembering what 



192 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


comes next. Try to time the tape so that you leave enough 
silent spaces for yourself to react. You might include the 
opening of the meditation on the tape, instructing yourself to 
relax, breathe deeply, etc. or you might simply leave a long 
silence. Either way, most people prefer to turn the tape on at 
the beginning and let the instructions come on without their 
having to make a conscious decision. You can, of course, use 
the same cassette over and over again, preparing cues for diffe¬ 
rent cards. Or you might make a general tape, with instruc¬ 
tions about relaxing, merging with the card, and so on. 

Above all, do not try to direct or control what will emerge. 
This holds for meditations you give to others as well as for 
yourself. There is a fine line here. Too little direction and the 
person’s attention will drift away; too much and you will not 
allow the subject's imagination to create its own world. As 
with other situations, experience is the best guide. For both 
yourself and others, try not to anticipate, and not to fear, what 
you experience. Most people do not respect their imaginations 
enough. They think they can understand whatever their 
imaginations show them. If they see sudden images of 
monsters, or devils, or death, they think it means something 
terrible coming from inside themselves, something they do not 
wish to face. But the imagination is far more subtle than that. 
It works in its own way, by its own rules. Often w'hat seems 
disturbing at first will transform into something inspiring. 
Jung called the imagination ‘the organ of the unconscious’. If 
you give it its head it will take you where your conscious mind 
would not have thought - or dared - to go. 

All this holds true especially for the Gate cards, as well as 
the Major ones. Their wordless quality of Strangeness leads us 
far beyond the literal meanings associated with them. At the 
same time, because they do represent certain qualities they 
can also help us achieve those qualities. If it helps to carry a 
card around it helps even more to carry a Major or Gate card. 
They are powerful images, with an effect all their own. The 
act of looking at the Nine of Pentacles, letting it sink into you, 
helps to create discipline, just as carrying and looking at the Six 
of Pentacles or the High Priestess will help you focus your 
awareness in a receptive way. 


HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


193 


CREATING A ‘MANDALA’ 

So far, we have considered ways to bring the influence of 
single cards into our lives. But a reading contains many cards 
which work together. To make a reading come alive, I have 
found it valuable to create what I call a ‘mandala' - a pattern 
formed from several cards. These cards can include not only 
those from the reading but others whose qualities will support 
the direction the reading advises. This act of deliberately 
adding cards not in the reading extends again the balance 
between the conscious and the unconscious. The reading has 
reached into the unconscious areas of knowledge to present a 
picture of the situation as it exists now. Through the mandala, 
and through the introduction of new cards deliberately taken 
from the deck, we can extend or transform the situation. 

Here is an example of a mandala in which no extra cards 
were necessary. The reading itself provided all the images we 
needed. The following Work Cycle (Fig. 64) concerned a 
woman w'ho felt isolated from the people around her despite 
several apparently good friendships. 

The Cross illustrated the situation perfectly: Two of 
Pentacles crossed by Six of Swords. It showed her central 
situation of pretending to enjoy life and relations with others 
(Two of Pentacles) producing a sense of functioning (‘the 
swords do not weigh down the boat’) while she remained 
unable to connect with the people around her. She remained 
like the woman in the boat, wrapped in her shroud, silent. 

Briefly, I interpreted the other cards as follows. The I lermit 
reversed in the position of Past Experience showed the reality 
of the friendships. At the same time, comparing it with the 
High Priestess at the end, it suggested she had not learned to 
use her sense of aloneness creatively, to develop her in¬ 
dividuality. The Eight of Swords reversed as the Expectations 
showed a desire to understand herself and the situation, 
thereby becoming free of it. It also reflected the political side 
of the problem, for a good deal of the woman’s isolation came 
from being a member of a minority group, with experiences 
not shared by any of her friends. At a certain level she was 
alone. But instead of appreciating her uniqueness among the 
people around her she allowed herself to hide her own 
experiences in an attempt to blend in. 

The three Work cards were King of Wands reversed, Death 





jp 

•1 

1 ■. 

! 











HOW TO USE TAROT READINGS 


195 


reversed, and Ten of Pentacles reversed. The fact that every 
card so far had come up reversed, and yet several - such as 
Eight of Swords reversed - invited a positive reading, showed 
the need for change. The King described an attitude to take 
towards herself and others; strong minded, yet tolerant of con¬ 
fusion and weakness. Death reversed, as inertia, indicated a 
danger in doing nothing. The need to turn it right side up 
became emphasized when we compared it with the Six of 
Swords above it. That card shows a journey modelled on the 
journey of dead souls. To release herself from the boat of isola¬ 
tion, the sense of a half-life, she would have to complete her 
journey by ‘dying’; that is, let go of the personality that had 
accustomed itself to superficial relationships and inner isola¬ 
tion. The Ten of Pentacles reversed indicated that to do this 
she would have to gamble with the security of her current 
situation and push her comfortable but limited friendships to 
more intense levels. 

The Ace of Swords, as the Outcome card showed the strong 
attitude as well as the sharp perceptive mind she would need, 
and find, to open up the current situation. The Result of this 
Outcome, the Eight of Wands, indicated the success of the 
gamble. The card carries suggestions of love and friendship. It 
symbolizes a journey - the spiritual boat-trip - coming to an 
end. Most directly, it signifies the Eight of Swords repression 
transformed into positive energy. 

We then turned over five more cards in a pattern of three 
below the Work cards, then one and one below the Centre. 
(There was no special reason for doing this instead of laying 
out another line. It was simply an intuitive choice - one that 
proved worthwhile.) The three cards gave more attitudes and 
approaches to the situation. First, the Wheel of Fortune 
reversed indicated the changes she wished to make. The 
reversed position suggested difficulties and reinforced the risk 
element of the Ten of Pentacles (remember that the Wheel is 
also 10). The Four of Pentacles came below Death reversed. It 
implied both the idea of releasing energy and of keeping a 
structure in her life while she challenged the pattern of her 
friendships. The third card continued this meaning. Coming 
below the Ten of Pentacles reversed, the Ten of Cups insisted 
that while the woman took these risks she must keep an 
awareness of the genuine love her friends felt for her. It 
referred also to the idea that she must not doubt the person 



196 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


she lived with, for there she received total support and should 
answer this gift with trust. 

The High Priestess indicated that in a certain sense she 
would remain alone, for the people around her would still not 
share her background and experiences. The silence of the 
High Priestess, however, is not the silence of the Six of Swords. 
Although silent to others, the High Priestess hints at a strong 
inner communication, an acceptance and knowledge of the 
self that a person cannot express in concrete rational terms to 
other people. The card spoke especially to the woman, who 
was a poet and had recently written a poem using the 
metaphor of a private language to express just this idea of 
deep knowledge available only to oneself. 

Below the High Priestess came the Empress, the other side 
of the feminine archetype. As in the Major Arcana, the two 
cards complemented each other, for the Empress signified a 
passionate involvement with life and friendship, not as an 
opposition to the High Priestess's inner awareness but as a 
result of it. From a position of self-acceptance the woman 
could give herself openly to the people around her. 

With such a powerful reading the woman wanted to work 
further with the images. We therefore constructed a mandala 
for use in meditation and study (see Fig. 65). We began with 
Death as the centre, for the transformation remained the key. 
Below Death came the High Priestess on the left, signifying 
the fact that inner communication must accompany the 
process for Death to produce real results. The Ace of Swords 
on the right, stood for sharpness of mind. The Empress went 
above, to bring about the desired new way of relating to the 
outside world. 

We next placed cards in the four corners around the 
structure, beginning with the Six of Swords and the Eight of 
Wands in the bottom left and right. The cards showed the 
journey and its hoped for end. For the top corners we used the 
Eight of Swords reversed and the King of Wands reversed - 
the desired action and the attitude needed to produce it. 
Finally, as ‘legs’ for the mandala, we placed the Ten of Cups 
below the Eight of Wands, and the Ten of Pentacles reversed 
below the Six of Swords. The images then looked like this: 











198 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


If you have a set of Rider Tarot cards arrange them as in the 
diagram and look at it for a while. Notice that for meditation 
you can concentrate on one card, such as Death in the centre, 
or let the entire pattern sink into the mind, perhaps moving 
the images about. Since the mandala contains all the 
elements, with the trumps in the middle, the woman could 
maintain balance by taking the image into herself. 

If you study such an arrangement new relationships emerge 
between the cards. The Eight of Swords and Eight of Wands 
are obvious partners; so are the Ten of Cups and Ten of 
Pentacles reversed. But the Eight of Wands and the King of 
Wands reversed will also provide new meanings when we 
consider them together, as do the Eight of Swords reversed 
and the Six of Swords. Because we have reshaped the reading 
into a geometric pattern we can draw lines, triangles, etc., 
constantly discovering new ideas and new patterns. In a way 
the mandala creates new readings from the same images. 

To construct such a pattern, choose the most important 
cards from the reading and work from the centre out, trying to 
build the image organically. Place the cards needed for 
support at the bottom and the cards symbolizing goals at the 
top. Do not hesitate to introduce cards not found in the 
original reading if you find a strong need for qualities these 
cards represent. If you see a need for Temperance, for 
instance, place it below the centre; or if the reading shows a 
need for more developed will-power and discipline you might 
place the Chariot and the Nine of Pentacles side by side above 
the mandala, as the goal. In this way, you take charge of the 
reading, opening it to include what your intuition tells you the 
person needs. 



Chapter 8. 

wl;at We L earn 
from Tarot Readings 

Most people consult a Tarot reading for specific information. 
Those who understand the cards a little more may look on the 
reading as a means of finding a direction. And those who 
follow a series of readings will see them as a method of keeping 
in harmony with the changing patterns of life. But to spend a 
long time reading cards for yourself and others is to discover 
many things beyond personal information. 

We have already seen some of these things. One is people's 
pessimistic reactions to readings. Another, more important, is 
the way Tarot readings require - and therefore create - a balance 
between subjective and objective, intuitive and rational, 
immediate impression and established knowledge, right and 
left side of the brain. We cannot create such a balance simply 
by wanting it. We have to let it grow. Tarot readings can help 
this happen. 

But the Tarot teaches us other things as well. It teaches us 
to pay attention. As we begin to learn the ways in which 
people act, and the ways in which the world acts on them, we 
become more and more in the habit of noticing what others do 
and what we do ourselves. Suppose a person becomes ill 
whenever a holiday approaches. This could go on for years 
without the person making the connection and seeing all those 
illnesses as a subconscious trick to avoid some problem or fear 
associated with holidays. A Tarot reading can make the 
person aware of this problem - and makes the reader aware of 
yet another example of subconscious manoeuvring, just the 
practice of reading the Tarot will help us observe these tricks 
of behaviour, in ourselves as well as in others. 

Once we start paying attention to what we do and what 
happens as a result we notice all sorts of things, not just 


200 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


through readings, but in daily life; patterns of anger and trust, 
hope and fear, how our response to situations may come from 
inside us rather than from the situation itself. We become 
more conscious of the way we deal with work and friends, of 
tendencies to shift responsibility either away from ourselves 
(It's not fair' or ‘You did this to me’) or onto ourselves (‘It's all 
my fault ’). We will notice, for instance, that saying ‘It's all my 
fault’ is often a trick to avoid seeing what we have actually 
done. By making it all or nothing, we make it easy to avoid a 
true assessment of the situation. 

Paying attention makes it just a little bit harder to get 
depressed or to manipulate other people. As we begin to 
observe the subtle reasons why people cry or become angry or 
accuse others, vve will at least know a little about ourselves 
when we do these things. 

Tarot readings make us aware of the wonderful variety of 
human nature. As the same cards come up in endless different 
combinations it becomes clear that people can always produce 
something new. At the same time, the newness will always 
come on top of underlying patterns. Through readings we 
learn in general the ways in which the past affects people, the 
ways in which their hopes and fears help create the future. But 
specific past situations and future expections - these will 
always surprise us. 

Here again we learn the habit of paying attention. For if we 
start interpreting the cards automatically on the basis of 
authoritative books or past readings then we lose the truth, 
and the readings become shallow and confused. Keep a book 
of past readings, yes, but not simply to use it as examples for 
future work. Instead, the book can help remind us of the 
variety and the constant newness of human behaviour. 

Notice that, as in creating balance, the Tarot does not 
simply help us to pay attention. It forces us to do so if we want 
our readings to produce good results. Tarot readings act as a 
kind of psychic exercise programme which strengthens the 
perceptive muscles. 

What people do with the information they get from Tarot 
readings teaches us some important lessons about free will. 
Many people look on the question of free will as an absolute. 
Either we make constant choices or we act according to 
destiny. To give it a more modern context, do we do what we 
do as a deliberate choice at that moment, or as a result of a 



WHAT WE LEARN FROM TAROT READINGS 


201 


lifetime (or many lifetimes) of conditioning? 

In terms of Tarot this becomes a practical question. If 1 act 
freely at any moment, then how can the cards predict what I 
will do? What meaning can the reading have if my choice 
remains totally open until the moment I do something? Or 
does some power force me to act the way the cards predict? 

These problems become easier if we give up the absolute all- 
or-nothing approach to the question. Then we can say yes, we 
always retain free will, but we rarely use it. Our conditioning, 
our past experience, above all our ignorance of all these 
things, tend to manipulate us in certain directions. The 
reading reflects these influences and shows their likely result. 
The cards do not compel the situation to turn out in a certain 
way. They simply reflect the way in which the influences 
combine in real life. We can make a diffferent decision when 
the time comes to act. And yet we do not. Over and over again 
in life, with little conscious knowledge, we surrender our 
freedom of choice. We allow our history and conditioning to 
move us. We do this partly from ignorance, and partly from 
laziness. It is much easier to follow conditioning than to act on 
truly conscious decisions. 

When I ‘failed to follow good advice', when I said to myself, 
‘Now that I’ve done the reading I can make sure those bad 
things won’t happen’, when I went ahead with my original 
plan so that the predicted problems arose, I demonstrated 
how I did not use my free will. I avoided it at the same time 
that I pretended to be acting on it. This sort of thing happens 
again and again, and the act of doing Tarot readings shows us 
very vividly the ways in which people deny their freedom. It is 
this relationship between freedom and conditioning which 
forms one of the most valuable pieces of knowledge the Tarot 
can give us. 

The Tarot teaches us as well the valuable lesson of context. 
No matter how absolute a quality may seem to us in the 
abstract, in reality it affects us only in the context of other 
influences. Readings demonstrate this fact in a practical way, 
as with the woman trying to deal with her lover’s jealousy. A 
card usually thought of as positive, the Sun, actually tended 
towards a bad result, for by hoping for the Sun she did not 
face the needs of the situation, and in fact allowed other 
people’s ideas to dictate what she wanted. 

Along with context we learn the ways in which the elements 



202 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


of life balance each other. We see first of all how the suits and 
specific cards combine to form a unified situation with no suit 
better or worse than any of the others. Astrologers often find 
that clients hope for certain signs and elements to dominate 
their charts, and will show disappointment or even shame if 
others appear. 

Similarly, for some people who know a little about Tarot, if 
a reading shows a lot of Wands, or Cups, they will feel comfor¬ 
ted; if it showed Swords they will become frightened; and if it 
shows Fentacles they will think of it as trivial, even insulting. 
Some will only accept a reading which contains many Major 
cards, because only the trumps, with their implications of 
power and spiritual awareness, appear important to them. 

But even the Major Arcana forms only one element, 
meaningless without the others. We study it in isolation for its 
wisdom and powerful description of existence. But in practice 
we need to mix the spiritual with the mundane, the happy 
with the sad, love and anger together to understand the world. 

The cards teach yet another balance, one hinted at in the 
scales of justice. How does the past relate to the future 
possibilities? How do we combine the effects of our own 
decision with the influences of the outside world ? What do we 
mean when we say we take responsibility for our lives? Does it 
mean we create or control everything that happens to us? As 
in the case of free will many people like to think of respon¬ 
sibility in an absolute way. Either the world shapes us 
entirely, or we retain total control over our lives. Tarot 
readings drive home the point that a person’s situation at any 
moment derives from a combination of these things. Just as a 
very short person cannot expect to become a professional 
basketball player, so that same person must not consider his 
whole life dominated by height. 

People who accept this idea in theory may still ask: Which 
counts most - situation or personal responsibility? Which one 
really controls a person? But Tarot readings demonstrate the 
meaninglessness of this and similar questions. In some 
readings the position of Self or Hopes and Fears will clearly 
dominate. In others Basis or Environment will prove the 
determining factors. It depends on the person and the par¬ 
ticular situation. 

Tarot readings help us develop confidence in our own 
perceptions. Partly this comes from the knowledge gained, 



WHAT WE LEARN FROM TAROT READINGS 


203 


and partly from the need to make choices and stick by them. 
Which of a card’s meanings applies in a particular case? Does 
a court card apply to the subject, some other person, or an 
abstract principle, such as the King of Swords signifying law 
and authority, or the Queen of Cups creativity? As we read 
more we find ourselves starting to sense the answers to these 
and similar questions. As a result we gain more trust in our 
understanding and intuition. 

What period does a reading cover? With the Celtic Cross or 
the Work Cycles, the answer can range from a few days to 
years, not just forwards, but backwards as well. Sometimes, 
for an adult, the reading can reach back to childhood. The 
Tree of Life, too, though it usually shows an overview of the 
whole life, can sometimes show a shorter period if the person 
is going through a time of intense change. 

The different periods of time covered especially in the 
shorter readings, depend on two things. First, the person's 
situation and the question asked. Some things, practical or 
legal matters and certain emotional situations, can bring forth 
an answer that makes itself apparent within a few days. With 
others - the working out of emotional conflicts, deep relation¬ 
ships, spiritual or artistic development - it can take a long 
time before the reading fulfils itself. This does not mean that 
the readings will not ‘come true’ for years. We are not 
speaking of predictions, but of continuing patterns that slowly 
unfold as time passes. 

Second, the different levels a person may touch when 
mixing the cards. Sometimes he or she may evoke surface 
situations which last only a short time. At other times the 
person may mix the cards and somehow go to the very centre 
of experience. And even here, the reading may show the deep 
past, or it may reflect the person’s potential for future develop¬ 
ment. 

The level reached may not depend at all on the attitude of 
the person mixing the cards. Usually this approach does make 
a difference. Someone who sees a reading as a joke or a game 
will most likely produce a shallow reading; the person who 
thinks deeply of a question, mixes the cards carefully, and 
tries to sense the exact moment to stop and cut the deck, will 
usually produce a reading of some significance. Yet sometimes 
even such a careful approach will not go below the surface 
events of the immediate future, w'hile at other times the most 



204 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


casual shuffler will suddenly find her or himself confronted 
with a powerful image of an entire life. For the reader such 
moments carry an intense excitement 

Even the question itself may not matter. People can ask 
about how their work is going, and receive an answer about 
their new- love affair, especially if that question occupies their 
mind more than the one they asked. Or, as in the case of the 
woman who found her sexuality blocked by conflicts with her 
father, the reading may answer the question by bringing up 
unexpected material from some other area. 

How do we know, then, what the reading tells us’ J Some 
things become obvious from the images of the cards. If we ask 
about w’ork and the Lovers and the Two of Cups appear, then 
the reading will probably concern not work but love. As a 
beginning reader, however, you cannot expect to uncover all 
subtleties. Experience alone will help you find your way to the 
heart of the labyrinth. As you continue w ith readings you will 
find yourself able to sense these things. And the heightened 
perception will carry over to other areas of your life as well. 

Sometimes, no matter what our experience or the sharpness 
of our intuition, we will make mistakes. We might look at the 
Lovers symbolically when it predicts a love affair with a 
person the subject still has not met. From this inability to 
know exactly what the cards mean we can actually learn a 
very valuable lesson. We become aw'are of Ignorance. I have 
capitalized this term because of its essential quality. While 
most of the knowledge we build up in life is really quite 
superficial and external, Ignorance lies at the very base of our 
existence. First of all, we are ignorant of the true nature of 
things. What we know of the w'orld is bounded by our sense 
organs. For us to see the words on this page, light must 
bounce off them to be collected by our eyes. Then the optic 
nerve carries impulses to the brain, which converts the 
impulses into others, arranging them into meaningful patterns 
our consciousness understands as language. But we cannot 
directly know, in the sense of merging with something out 
there. We can only convert the universe into impulses, 
patterns, symbols. 

Similarly, because we exist in physical form, we must w'ork 
out our lives in the boundaries of time. This means, among 
other things, that we cannot realize all our potential, because 
we must always choose to do one thing and not another with 




WHAT WE LEARN FROM TAROT READINGS 


205 


the few' years available to us. A person with the ability to 
become both a dancer and a businessman will have to choose 
one over the other. And which ever he chooses he will have to 
work for years before he can actually achieve his goal, l ime 
means also that we often cannot know the consequences of 
actions we take, simply because the consequences might not 
appear until years in the future. Sometimes the consequences 
of our actions appear not to us but to other people. Something 
we do in a certain place may affect people there long after we 
have moved, or even died. Quite simply, time means things 
must happen before we can know about them. 

Meditation with the Eight of Swords as a Gate can increase 
our awareness of Ignorance. Tarot readings - and the 
mistakes we make as we try to interpret them - can demon¬ 
strate Ignorance more directly. A Tarot reading actually 
reaches beyond time, bringing out the true pattern that 
includes past and future. The random pattern of the cards 
leads us to bypass the limitations of consciousness. And yet 
that limited consciousness must interpret the reading. 
Therefore, at one and the same time, w-e experience the true 
state of the universe, in which all things exist together, and our 
owm extremely limited lime-bound knowledge of it. We 
experience both truth and ignorance. 

The other side of Ignorance is Certitude, the state of 
knowing reality, rather than the impressions and symbols our 
limited consciousness forms from it. Many people consider 
ecstasy, or oneness with the light of God, as the supreme goal 
of the mystic or occultist. But as the Major Arcana of the 
Tarot demonstrates, the lightning bolt of ecstasy forms only a 
step along the way. 'The true goal is Certitude, the state of 
knowing where before we could only guess. 

What is the real cause of any single action? What will its 
consequences be, not just to the person who has acted, but to 
others, both known and unknown? Those few people who 
have achieved Certitude can see the causes and consequences 
within the action itself. The rest of us can only guess about 
these and a thousand other things. We remain Ignorant. 

But even if we cannot guess at the true interpretation of a 
Tarot reading, the reading itself reaches beyond that time- 
bound Ignorant state. The reading carries Certitude, if not the 
reader. And if we work enough with cards, comparing our 
interpretations with subsequent events, becoming more and 



206 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


more involved with the pictures, developing our intuition, then 
sometimes we can get experiences of Certitude, of knowing the 
true meaning of something. While such experiences carry 
their own value, they serve us most by giving us a sense of 
direction. They help us perceive what we want to achieve. 

Finally, the practice of Tarot reading teaches us something 
else. Because the cards arc not neutral in their attitude to life, 
because they embody certain approaches and beliefs, and 
renounce others, they change us. We begin over time - always 
over time - to see the balance of things, the steady harmony 
within the constant shift and flow of life. We become aware of 
the Strangeness always waiting beyond our ordinary 
experience, we learn to recognize the gifts we receive from 
existence, and our own responsibility to understand and use 
them. Most of all, we begin to grasp the truth the Tarot 
always urges upon us - that the universe the whole universe, 
lives. And what we can know of ourselves we can know of 
everything. 





Index 


Adam and Eve 25, 94 
Air, element of (see Swords) 

Air of Water 51 
Book o/Thoth, The 124 
Builders of the Adytum deck 9 
Case, Paul Foster 11 
Celtic Cross reading, The 140- 
158,147 

Sample reading 151-158,152 
Crowley deck 7, 8, 9, 124, 137 
Cups 48-70 
King of 50-51 
Queen of 52-53 
Knight of 54-55 
Page of 56-57 
Ten of 20, 48,57-58 
Nine of 58-59 
Eight of 59-61 
Seven of 61-62 
Six of 62-63 
Five of 63-64 
Four of 65 
Three of 66-67 
Two of 67-68 
Ace of 69 

Death card 54, 55, 85 
Devil, The 110 

Divination; Introduction to 123- 
135 

Types of Readings 136-181 
Use of 182-206 

Earth, element of (see Pentacles) 
Emperor, The 73, 74 


Empress, The 43 
Fire, element of (see Wands) 
Fire of Fire 32 
Fire of Water 55 
Fool, The 67, 68, 84, 96.97, 104 
Garden of Eden 25 
Gate cards 20-21,43, 60, 64, 82, 
85,95, 102, 104, 109, 112, 
120, 192 

Golden Dawn, Order of 10, 39, 
55,89 

Grail, The 57, 66, 69, 70, 88 
Hanged Man 84, 135 
Heh (see Tetragrammaton) 
Hermes 68 

Hermit, The 59, 60, 64, 120 
Hierophant, The 110, 113, 114 
High Priestess 90, 91, 134 
Justice card 73, 74, 76, 102, 111, 
135 

King Arthur 69, 70 
Kundalini 25 
Lovers, The 67, 68, 110 
Magician, The 98. 118, 134 
Mandala 193-197 
Marseilles pack 7, 8 
Meditation 187-192 
Moroccan Tarot 11 
Ouspensky, P.D. 19 
Pentacles 94-120 
King of 96-97 
Queen of 98-99 
Knight of 99-100 


\ 


208 


SEVENTY-EIGHT DEGREES OF WISDOM 


Page of 101 
Ten of 102-104 
Nine of 105-106 
Eight of 107-108 
Seven of 108 
Six of 109-113 
Five of 113-115 
Four of 11,115-116 
Three of 117-118 
Two of 118-119 
Ace of 119-120 
Pictorial Key, The 84, 124, 137 
Qabalah 9, 170, 171, 172, 173 
Querent 136 

Rider pack (background to) 7- 

12 

Sephiroth 9, 170, 171 
Significator card 138, 139, 140, 
160, 173 

Smith, Pamela Colman 7, 8, 10, 
84 

Strength 118 
Swords 71-93 
King of 73-75 
Queen of 75-76 
Knight of 71, 77 
Page of 78-79 
Ten of 79-80 
Nine of 80-81 
Eight of 82-83 
Seven of 83-84 
Six of 84-86 
Five of 86-87 
Four of 87-88 
Three of 89-90 
Two of 12, 90-91 


Ace of 92-93 
Synchronicity 130, 132 
Temperance card 140 
Tetragrammaton 14, 17-19 
Tower, The 41, 42 
Tree of Life 9, 25, 102, 126 
Tree of Life reading, The 169- 
181,173 

Vav (see Tetragrammaton) 
Visconti-Sforza deck 12 
Waite, Arthur Edward 7, 8, 12, 
29, 37, 45, 47, 50, 53, 59, 
66,78,81,84, 90, 101, 111, 
119, 124 
Wands 25-47 
King of 27-29 
Queen of 30-31 
Knight of 31-32 
Page of 33-34 
Ten of 34-35 
Nine of 36-37 
Eight of 3 7-38 
Seven of 38-39 
Six of 39-40 
Five of 40-41 
Four of 41-42 
Three of 43-44 
Two of 45-46 
Ace of 46-47 

Water, element of (see Cups) 
Wheel of Fortune 135 
Work Cycle reading, The 158- 
169,161 

Sample reading 165-169,166, 
168 

Yod (see Tetragrammaton), 46 


I 



